CHAPTER 1: RETHINKING THE FOREIGN POLICY AGENDA Foreign policy is made, not given.
It is a continual process of exercising political will, of mobilizing national resources to meet international challenges.
Even the most powerful nations in the world must take full account of international forces; how much more true of Canada.
Conversely, foreign policies are also determined by internal forces.
The ability to mobilize national resources depends on a country's human and physical attributes but beyond that on a sense of purpose that comes from a successful combination of national goals and international responsibilities.
In Canada's case the potential is there, as is the desire of Canadians to see their country continue to play a responsible and influential role in the world.
We hope this report will help give sharpened purpose to that desire.
Every foreign policy review must respond to a set of changing international and domestic circumstances.
The 1969-70 review occurred during the Cold War, but when there were glimmerings of détente and when Canadians were preoccupied with issues of unity and independence.
By 1985-86, when the last review was conducted, the themes were international security and competitiveness, independence and internationalism.
The circumstances of 1994 are once more different from those of only a decade ago.
We are in a new era of accelerated change, as we have been told repeatedly in the course of our hearings.
The most dramatic change has been the passing of the Cold War, but other interrelated forces are changing the nature of security, globalizing economies and societies, and reshaping national sovereignty.
The Changing Global Scene The end of the Cold War has transformed the security environment, not only in Europe but around the world.
In Europe the old Yalta order has been swept away but has not yet been succeeded by a new order.
It has brought freedom and the opportunity to build better societies, but it has left elements of uncertainty, instability and disunity.
There is uncertainty about the transition to democracy in Eastern Europe and Russia, as Université du Québec à Montréal professor Jacques Lévesque told us. 
There is instability arising from the re-emergence out of the communist deep freeze of long-standing nationalist rivalries and ethnic tensions, not least in the former Soviet Union.
And there is disunity, not only in the East, where the communist system has disintegrated, but also in the West, where the end of the East-West ideological struggle has, as Dalhousie professor Denis Stairs explained (18:21), weakened the perceived need for transatlantic solidarity.
In Asia too the passing of the Cold War is a mixed blessing.
It has put an end to the US-Soviet competition and the Sino-Soviet stand-off, and with the possible exception of North Korea, has encouraged a greater opening to exchanges with the West.
The finding of a new regional equilibrium is likely to be complicated, however, as University of British Columbia professor Brian Job pointed out, by "territorial disputes, proliferation of weapons, possibilities of civil unrest, and the prospect of unsustainable 
In the rest of the world the old compass bearings have gone.
East-West relations no longer define North-South relations, and for some countries international assistance has lost its dominant geopolitical dimension.
North and South have themselves become imprecise terms; the very notion of the Third World has become obsolete at a time when the South is increasingly diverse, and the gap between rich and poor is as great within the South as it is between North and South.
The new world presents threats but also opportunities.
Instead of the relatively stable East-West confrontation there is, in the words of Dalhousie professor Dan Middlemiss (18:14) a "threat-ambiguous environment" which is difficult to plan for.
Where once we knew who the adversary was, future adversaries are unpredictable or elusive.
The problem is no longer defence of the West against the East, but collective assurance for all against a breakdown of international law and order caused by those who still rely on the unauthorized use of force to impose their will.
That is the challenge.
Military force is still too often the final arbiter of human affairs, but non-military factors, such as political stability, economic strength, environmental sustainability and social cohesion, are increasingly important in the strategic equation.
In addition there are unconventional threats to security from terrorism, the illicit drug and arms trade, mass migration and epidemics like AIDS.
As more than one witness pointed out, competition for resources, environmental degradation and declining living standards are sources of instability and potential conflict.
The old bipolar world order has given way to a much more complex power structure.
In military terms, the United States remains the dominant power in all regions of the world, but it no longer has either the economic resources or the political will to continue playing the leadership role it once did.
In political and economic terms, the world now revolves around the United States, the European Union (EU) and Japan, all of which need each other for security but are in sharp competition with each other economically.
To these three China may soon be added, and Russia must also be taken into account.
The explosion of technology has caused a revolution in transportation, communications and information processing, compressing time and space, erasing national borders and leading to fundamental economic and social changes.
Globalization has created growing interdependence of countries and peoples.
The accumulating impact of economic and population growth on the global environment is plain to see.
Growing interdependence has in turn led to an expanding consensus in favour of trade liberalization, and in some cases, to regional integration.
Non-governmental actors have become major international players.
The primary agents of globalization are in fact the transnational corporations (TNCs), which are the most important source of foreign direct investment (FDI).
In the words of the 1994 World Investment Report, published by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development: "A substantial share of global output is being reorganized under the common governance of TNCs...
In the process, the nature of the global economy is undergoing a fundamental change: from being a collection of independent national economies linked primarily through markets, the world economy is becoming, for the first time, an international production system."
The liberalization of trade and investment, along with the greater mobility of factors of production, is no doubt promoting efficiencies.
The shift from labour intensive to capital intensive production has also encouraged "jobless growth", however.
For some developing countries, able to secure investor confidence and to combine investment with lower labour costs, growth is robust.
For many industrial countries, however, the structural adjustments are painful.
Globalization is also blurring the line separating foreign from domestic policy, since more and more of the domestic policy agenda becomes subject to the forces of global competition.
The transnational mobility of capital generates pressures for deeper harmonization of national policies.
In the competition for comparative advantages governments must deal with pressures to cut back on social and environmental programs that may raise the cost of producing goods and services, and to lower corporate taxes.
All these developments have an impact on the nature of sovereignty and the way the state works.
Pressures are working on two levels to narrow the range of policy options open to national governments.
On one level the trend toward greater global interdependence is forcing states to share sovereignty in order to deal with problems that can be resolved only through international co-operation. The ability of governments to determine independently their internal affairs is increasingly constrained by international rule-making.
This in turn raises the question of the democratic legitimacy of the international institutions involved in this process.
On another level the desire of people to belong and to get more hands-on control of their affairs, precisely because of the effects of globalization, is leading national governments to devolve more and more effective authority to sub-national entities.
On both levels then -- the transnational and the sub-national -- the resources at the disposal of national governments are diminishing.
We can also see the changing nature of sovereignty in the proliferation of new states resulting from decolonization, including most recently the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
The number of sovereign states has more than tripled since 1945, and this multiplication makes international problem solving far more difficult.
Many of them suffer from a lack of economic infrastructure, social cohesion and political stability.
Most have unnatural, "colonial" borders and are net consumers rather than net producers of security.
Yet national borders, as we have seen, are becoming more and more porous, and national sovereignty, an increasingly qualified concept.
Democracy, good governance and respect for human rights are more and more demanded by the people,
and increasingly accepted by the international community as legitimate subjects of international concern, and even international intervention.
All these trends have implications for Canada.
The end of the Cold War has removed the US-Soviet nuclear confrontation, and with it the potential threat of collateral damage to Canada in a nuclear exchange.
More widely it has opened up new opportunities for co-operation among former adversaries, for constructive action in the UN and for the peaceful negotiation of some regional conflicts (e.g. the Middle East peace process, the settlements in Central America and Cambodia, the Namibia agreement).
Regrettably the smaller wars and ethnic conflicts that persist have not only caused human suffering but have also ruined business, squandered past development aid and created huge demands for emergency relief.
At the same time the end of the bipolar world order may allow more room for diplomatic manoeuvre to middle and small powers, as former ambassador Allan Gotlieb suggested.
"We are really moving in terms of the international position with potentially a far greater field of action," he said, "which presents very major new opportunities."
If, in other words, the vision is there of the sort of world we want to see, and the will is there to work for it, the opportunities are certainly there to be seized.
There is little distinction any more between foreign and domestic policies; what is done domestically has an impact on foreign policy, and vice versa.
Foreign policy must operate with an effective domestic base, and that domestic base must rest on the effective projection abroad of key elements of the national life, including particularly the cultural and educational elements.
In this sense foreign policy is domestic policy.
It affects Canadians in their daily lives -- standard of living, jobs, environment, the management of resources, the refugees that seek asylum here, and the young Canadian peacekeepers who put their lives on the line.
In this sense too, domestic policy is foreign policy.
To put their own economic house in order, and to conduct a coherent or effective foreign policy, it is vital for Canadians to maintain their solidarity.
Conversely, Canadians' sense of their own self-worth depends on seeing their country playing a role in the world of which they can be proud.
Canada in Flux Canada itself has changed greatly over the years, as is evident from the Committee's hearings, and what has been happening in Canada has affected the way Canadians are responding to events abroad.
The impact of recent international events has raised new questions about Canadian values and interests, and how to protect and promote them.
New Canadians arriving in growing numbers from Asia, Africa and Latin America have increased and enriched Canada's ethnic diversity.
The Canadian population is no longer overwhelmingly of European origin, and Chinese has become the most prevalent language after English and French.
By the same token there has been a certain shift of attention from the Atlantic to the Pacific Rim.
The new Canadians have brought family ties, knowledge of other languages, cultures and habits which could be valuable tools in promoting Canada's foreign relations.
Having in many cases experienced poverty, pollution and persecution first hand, they are acutely aware that Canada is a favoured and privileged society worth preserving.
Another feature of the changing scene in Canada is the growing democratization of foreign policy.
The range of foreign policy actors has expanded beyond federal, provincial and even municipal governments to include private sector associations, academic and professional institutions and NGOs, and they are contributing increasingly to both policy development and program delivery.
Foreign affairs are less and less an exclusive concern of the federal government and more and more a "Team Canada" effort.
Moreover, the media plays a powerful role in determining how these matters appear on the public policy agenda.
The human dimension of policy is increasingly prominent, be it in the form of human rights, the status of women, the special needs of visible minorities, the importance of education and self-improvement, or the call for social justice and equality of opportunity.
Increased competition has brought advantages, but also painful adjustments to the Canadian economy.
The liberalization of trade has boosted exports, and some sectors of the economy (the high-tech and service industries and niche firms in particular) have fared well in the new competitive climate.
But resource-based industries have had a difficult adjustment to the world-wide depression of commodity prices and the competition from alternative sources of supply.
Some of the manufacturing industries have suffered from the combined impact of free trade and global restructuring, which has exposed them to lower cost competitors elsewhere.
This situation has not been helped by internal trade barriers that remain a major impediment to our success in the international market, in spite of the recent federal-provincial agreement to reduce them.
Rebounding export-led growth rates suggest that recession may be receding, but the country continues to carry the burden of high unemployment and a heavy public debt.
In the new, knowledge-based global economy, Canada is having difficulty maintaining its position among the major economic powers.
In research and development (R&D), productivity and innovation Canada has fallen behind its competitors, and human resource development has been slow to produce the necessary skills.
Tax rates and investment patterns have not helped.
Canadian entrepreneurs have lacked aggressiveness in seeking new markets overseas.
Canada is a trading nation but has not yet proved itself to be a nation of traders.
Long-term concerns about environmental protection and resource conservation are frequently in conflict with short-term concerns about employment and commercial gain.
The rapid depletion of certain fish stocks and other vulnerable resources, however, has forced governments to make painful decisions.
They are also facing strong pressures from pro-conservation forces, both at home and abroad, which exercise restraints on policy making.
On the other hand, there are growing opportunities for Canada's environmental industries, and Canada has been a leader in developing international programs to protect the environment.
Unfortunately Canada's image has been tarnished by the negative and sometimes unwarranted publicity it has received abroad about the way it has been treating its own environment.
Culturally Canada has been experiencing a period of unprecedented creativity.
Two apparently contradictory developments have been going on at the same time.
On the one hand, Canadians have been inundated as never before by a flood of American information, entertainment and pop culture.
On the other hand, Canadians have been producing their own cultural creations in every field of the arts in a quantity and quality never seen before, and this in both English and French-speaking Canada, among the First Nations and other cultural communities.
There may in fact be a connection between the two developments, in the sense that the challenge of globalization has triggered a rebirth of indigenous creativity that draws its inspiration and its vision from the well-springs of this country's history, geography and social fabric.
There are new opportunities now for an active projection abroad of all the Canadian cultures, and a greater need than ever before.
Canada is going through a period of national redefinition which further complicates the task of responding to the changes at home and abroad.
Repeated failures to resolve constitutional differences have left Canadians disenchanted and foreigners perplexed.
Renewed talk about a division of the country sends a message of fragmentation.
Internal dissension hampers the full utilization of Canada's diverse human resources.
In addition there is creative tension between the practical advantages of interdependence with the United States and the political imperative of "made in Canada" policies that reflect the Canadian identity.
To be able to deal with the challenges of the present and the future, Canadians must not only have a clear vision of their role in the world but must also be able to arrange their own affairs in such a way as to maximize their potential for constructive action abroad.
On the one hand, they must project Canada's reality abroad.
On the other, they must increasingly measure themselves, not by their own national standards, but by international standards.
Canadian Values and Interests While the face of Canada has been changing rapidly, there are some inherent factors influencing Canada's international role that have remained unchanged: 
* In socio-cultural terms, Canadian policy must reflect the reality of two official languages, many cultures and a bi-juridical system.
* In political terms, Canada's federal system exercises significant influence on the conduct of foreign policy, while areas of provincial and shared federal-provincial jurisdiction are increasingly the subject of international negotiations.
* Economically, Canada's prosperity is highly dependent on international trade, especially trade with the United States.
* Geopolitically, Canada is bound by the reality of its geography, a northern country with a vast but sparsely populated land mass and the longest coastline in the world, and of its asymmetrical relationship with the United States, its most important partner and closest friend and ally.
The values underlying Canada's civil society have also remained remarkably constant: the practice of dialogue, tolerance and compromise; the commitment to an open, democratic society, to human rights and to social and economic justice; responsibility for solving global environmental problems; working for international peace; and helping to ease poverty and hunger in the developing world.
Canada is in many ways a microcosm of the international society of tomorrow, where people of diverse origins can live together in harmony and share the fruits of their labours.
These are values that Canadians have carried over to their approach to foreign affairs.
They want a value-based foreign policy, as witnesses told us repeatedly.
These values can serve as criteria for consistent policies,
policies that should be principled but pragmatic, idealistic in concept but realistic in application.
The skills Canadians can bring to foreign affairs are related to the values.
Canadians have demonstrated an ability to moderate, to mediate and to find common ground between opposing sides.
They have special knowledge of the problems of good governance in a diverse society.
They have been active in fighting pollution, promoting conservation, and helping the less fortunate.
And they have more experience of peacekeeping than anyone else.
The values and the skills are there, but can the necessary resources be mobilized to serve Canadian interests?
On the one hand, the financial resources available to government are decidedly more tightly constrained than they have been for a long time, and this is unlikely to change soon.
Consequently, choosing more carefully what needs to be done, and finding ways of getting more out of what we have, will remain a major challenge for the execution of Canadian foreign policy for a long time to come.
On the other hand, the Co-Chairs of the National Forum reminded us that, if the money available to government is tighter than in the past, the resources of Canadian society have grown richer and more varied over the years.
As Pierre Pettigrew put it: Forum members tended to say that the role of government was to mobilize and co-ordinate what does exist in Canadian society.
There are a lot of extraordinary resources in Canadian society.
Government is broke but Canadian society isn't.
At the same time the Committee recognizes, as Janice Stein, the other Co-Chair of the National Forum reported, that "the Government of Canada cannot be everywhere and try to do everything... if it does, it will not succeed in developing policies of comparative advantage."
Canadians have to make choices, as witnesses continually reminded us, if they are to allocate available resources where we can get maximum value in terms of Canadian interests.
Once the choices have been made, it will be essential to have a strong, adequately equipped professional foreign service adapted to the changing demands of international affairs.
While Canada's foreign policy agenda has expanded substantially to meet new international requirements, expenditures on foreign operations have declined by 25% over the past decade.
There is a limit to the extent to which more can be done with less.
We should therefore like to emphasize the need to ensure that the resources for the instruments of foreign policy, including the foreign service, be appropriately allocated and commensurate with the objectives of foreign policy that will emerge from this report.
The central challenge of this review is to reassess Canadian interests in the light of the rapidly changing global scene, to take stock again of the national resources available, and to adjust the application of Canadian foreign policy in order to make the most of the opportunities for serving not only Canadian interests but the interests of a more peaceful, prosperous and humane world.
A New Foreign Policy Agenda There was unanimous agreement, among all who appeared before the Committee, that Canada should not retreat from the world.
There was in fact a strong underlying conviction that Canadians must be more globalist in outlook and action. They believe that the well-being of Canada and Canadians is bound up with that of the rest of the world.
Betty Plewes, Executive Director of the Canadian Council for International Co-operation, expressed it well when she remarked that "the national interest has a vast global dimension...
We think this moment calls for us to be co-operative international citizens."
The following chapters will analyze in detail the Canadian interests involved and the options available, bilaterally, regionally and multilaterally, and will make recommendations for future Canadian policies.
Running through the report is the guiding theme, suggested in a brief submitted by members of the National Capital Branch of the Canadian Institute of International Affairs, that the most important global requirements for the 90s and beyond are for shared security, shared prosperity and shared custody of the environment.
Canada can best contribute to these requirements if it is confident in its multifaceted identity and vigorous in projecting it abroad through its cultures and its educational resources.
Each of these requirements is essential to Canada, to the survival of this planet and the well-being of its people.
Canada's security depends on a stable international order reinforced by multilateral co-operation.
Canada's prosperity calls for a modern economy which has to be increasingly integrated into a prosperous global economy.
Even in terms of nature's resources, where Canada is better off than most countries, it is still dependent on collective action to safeguard the environment.
We will have shared security, shared prosperity and a healthy environment for all, or none of us will have any in the long run.
The need is for the establishment of norms of international behaviour, and rules-based regimes, which exclude arbitrary or unilateral actions by one state that harm the legitimate interests of others.
Canada has a strong interest in helping to develop a regime of collective security, under UN auspices, to guard against the breakdown of international law and order.
Canada's dependence on international trade argues for energetic action to build trade, investment and technological links and strategic business alliances, combined with strong support for the widest possible liberalization of trade but also for an effective system of world trade rules.
Canada also has an important interest in helping to alleviate poverty and contributing to the sustainable development of the economic and human resources of the developing countries, on the basis not only that this is a moral imperative for responsible global citizens but also that it will encourage political stability, good governance and respect for human rights.
Canada has similar reasons for doing what it can to encourage the development of international law, the peaceful resolution of disputes, and wider respect for human rights, bearing in mind that virtue begins at home.
Canada has some very specific interests related to its position astride the northern half of the North American continent.
There is first of all the manifest need to manage the all-important relationship with the United States as a co-operative partnership of mutual respect.
At the same time there is a need for Canada to seek wider involvement in the world beyond North America.
Canada is also deeply affected by how it manages and conserves its fish stocks, forests and other vulnerable resources.
Last but not least, Canada has a growing interest in responding to and reconciling the aboriginal, environmental and development needs in the Arctic.
In this "global village" the quality of life of the villagers is increasingly beyond their capacity, or even their country's capacity, to determine alone.
It depends more and more on the way we nurture the international society and manage the global commons.
This sort of international engagement does not happen by itself, however;
there has to be a vision, it has to be articulated, and it has to be organized, co-ordinated and supported by substantial intellectual and financial resources.
This is the challenge, but also the opportunity, for Canada and Canadians today.
CHAPTER 2: STRENGTHENING SHARED SECURITY
Our security is affected increasingly by non-military factors, and these factors may have as much to do with internal stability within states as with international stability.
This in turn complicates the task of the international community in trying to deal in a timely and effective way with threats to security.
It also complicates the making of Canada's security policies.
While the new global environment appears to be less directly threatening to Canada in a military sense, the demands on Canada to contribute to international security have increased, rather than diminished, just at a time when fiscal restraint makes it more difficult to respond.
This chapter deals primarily with the international context of Canadian security, but we recognize that there are also sovereignty and security concerns closer to home, particularly in the Arctic.
A report on defence policy -- Security in a Changing World -- was recently tabled in Parliament.
A Broader Concept of Security As many witnesses emphasized to the Committee, the Cold War focus on military power and risk of major war has given way to a broader security concept in keeping with globalization.
The top priority of Canadian foreign policy, according to Pierre Pettigrew, one of the Co-Chairs of the National Forum on Canada's International Relations, is "human security", which he defined as "human rights, economic prosperity and environmentally sustainable development".
Mohamed Sahnoun stated that: "The ingredients of crises, which are of course there, call them ethnic, religious or social, gather like clouds before the storm when circumstances dictate for them to do so.
It is clear that these circumstances have much to do with economic and resource issues''.
Geoffrey Pearson told the Committee that internal conflict is likely to spread for two main reasons: the continuing income disparity between rich and poor; and the pressure of population on resources.
The escalation of small conflicts into larger ones, according to Allan Blakeney, represents the principal danger to world peace in the short run.
We have found these contributions enlightening, as is reflected throughout this report.
It is clear that rapidly emerging global problems such as population, poverty, pollution and weapons proliferation constitute growing threats to Canada's security.
And these problems are interrelated.
Pressure on resources may result from population growth and may be exacerbated by growing disparity between rich and poor.
Accumulated environmental degradation may make matters worse.
That in turn may lead to reduced agricultural production, economic decline, population displacement and disruption of the social fabric.
The resulting desperation is a breeding ground for violence.
These conditions are often combined with lack of democratic norms, abuse of human rights and mistreatment of minorities, which also carry the seeds of violence.
Instabilities in any of these fields may lead to the use or threat of force or the risk of war;
conversely, armed conflict may well have an impact on one or more of these fields.
Policies on the environment, trade and development assistance relate directly to our security.
They are sufficiently distinct, however, to warrant specific treatment rather than lumping them indiscriminately in the security basket.
We therefore think it would be wise to draw a clear distinction between traditional security concerns, involving the use or threat of force, and the new global security concerns, involving non-military factors that may cause harm to the interests of others or cause instabilities that could lead to violence.
The choice of the appropriate policy instrument to deal with specific situations will be made more effectively if this distinction is kept in mind.
For a country like Canada in particular, which cannot set the international agenda but must set its own priorities, we do not think it would be helpful to force policy making into an unrealistic straitjacket.
As Denis Stairs, of Dalhousie University, put it, "You have to be very careful about laying down formulae in advance, particularly for a power like Canada, which after all is not a major power."
Nor would it be helpful to argue about security labels, such as collective, co-operative and common security.
The task is collective -- all states to agree to renounce the use or threat of force among themselves and to assist any member under attack.
The methods must be co-operative -- seeking through multilateral methods to work with others, not against them.
And the results should be shared in common -- security as one dimension of the "global commons".
There are several important corollaries to draw from this broader concept of security. One is that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.
The trouble is that, the earlier preventive action is contemplated, the harder it is to muster the political will to act.
The crisis in the former Yugoslavia is a case in point.
And it is often difficult to know what kind of action would be most effective.
In the case of Rwanda, for example, international assistance was not sufficient to prevent the outbreak of ethnic conflict, and it is a moot question whether timely military intervention by the international community could have prevented the civil war.
Another corollary is that foreign policy and defence policy need to be mutually reinforcing.
Foreign policy should be supported by a credible defence policy, and defence policy should be in the service of clearly defined foreign policy goals.
Strategy should strive to match military means to political commitments.
While never easy, the problems of prevention can be made more tractable by the close co-ordination of foreign and defence policies.
Still another corollary has to do with the fact that foreign and domestic policies are two sides of the national policy coin.
Intimately related as it is with foreign policy, domestic policy is equally affected by the expanding scope of factors bearing on the security of Canada and Canadians.
A high degree of policy co-ordination is therefore called for to ensure compatibility among the various elements of both foreign and domestic policies.
What may be required is some mechanism within the government structure to relate these various elements of security to one another in a holistic approach to policy making.
The Committee is convinced of the need to adopt a broader concept of security, encompassing both military and non-military factors.
The Committee further recommends that this concept be reflected both in the establishment of a high-level government mechanism, such as a Cabinet committee, and in a restructuring of the relevant Standing Committees of Parliament, in order to ensure that the various elements of security are addressed in an integrated manner.
The following sections address aspects of security involving the use or threat of force.
Elements of the broader security agenda are addressed in other chapters.
The United Nations The end of the Cold War has liberated the UN Security Council from the superpower confrontation, has raised public expectations and has opened up new opportunities for the UN with respect to international peace and security.
At the same time it has presented the UN with new and unprecedented challenges, including a wave of humanitarian and peacekeeping emergencies, for which it is ill-equipped.
Today the UN is overworked, overextended and underfunded, and the post-Cold War requirement for a collective security regime has been only haltingly addressed.
The questions that are now increasingly pressing are, what can be done to revitalize the UN, to improve both its performance and its image, and what can Canada contribute in particular?
The UN is us of course, in the sense that the UN cannot do anything its member states do not want it to do.
For their part, Canadians (as they made clear in the course of the Committee's hearings) want to see the UN re-established as a real force for a rules-based international system.
At the same time they see the need for a thoroughgoing reform of that organization to regain the public respect it has lost.
If the UN is to live up to its potential, more will have to be done to give it the effective structures, the political guidance and the resources it now lacks.
The question of structures concerns first of all reform of the Security Council, which must enjoy the confidence of the whole membership.
Two relevant aspects are presently under study: the question of enlarging the Security Council; and the question of the Council's methods of work.
There seems to be broad agreement that the Council should be enlarged in order to strengthen the legitimacy of its decisions.
The Canadian Committee for the 50th Anniversary of the UN offered a series of thoughtful proposals in its booklet Canadian Priorities for UN Reform.
Nevertheless, several questions remain to be resolved: 
* How many members should be added to the present 15?
It is probably impossible to add fewer than four, if the needs of the developing countries are to be accommodated, and it would be best not to add more than six, if the size of the Council is to be held within manageable limits.
* How many permanent seats should be added?
Japan and Germany are leading candidates, but the South also has a reasonable claim to as many as three permanent seats (one each from Latin America, Asia and Africa).
* Should the new permanent members have the veto?
The veto is in many ways a vestige of the rapidly shrinking concept of national sovereignty, and hence a relic of the past.
While it is not realistic to expect the present permanent members to give it up, nothing in our view should be done to extend it and everything should be done to reduce its significance.
There are both principled and practical reasons to make the Council's proceedings more transparent.
The Council's practice of working in private sessions no doubt contributes to the building of consensus and avoiding deadlock or the use of the veto.
On the other hand, we agree with the recent Canadian Ambassador to the UN, Louise Fréchette, (44:8) that the Council should pay more attention to the needs of countries that are not on the Council but have specific interests or concerns related to the Council's deliberations (e.g. countries that are contributing troops to UN peace operations).
Such countries have every right to be kept informed of developments and to have ready access to the Council when necessary, and the Council in turn stands to gain from facilitating such two-way communication.
The Committee believes that steps should be taken without delay to enlarge the Security Council to make it more representative,
and that the Council should adopt more transparent methods of work that would facilitate communication between Council members and countries that are not on the Council but have specific interests or concerns to express.
Canadians take justifiable pride in the role Canada has played in UN peace operations from the beginning.
Janice Stein, Co-Chair of the National Forum, noted that peacekeeping was mentioned as a priority by almost all those that took part in the Forum and that ``the overwhelming sense was that this is an area of comparative advantage for Canadians.'' (2:10)
At the same time, the number and nature of those operations have expanded enormously since the first peacekeepers went into Suez in 1956.
"Peacekeeping'' is now used loosely to cover a growing variety of peace operations, from preventive diplomacy through peacemaking and peacekeeping to peace building.
Today there are about 70,000 UN troops from some 70 countries participating in 18 peace operations around the world, up from 12,000 at the beginning of 1992.
Canada is the eighth largest contributor, with between 2,500 and 3,000 troops, or about 3.5% of the total, which is roughly comparable to Canada's share of the UN budget.
With the increasing size and complexity of peace operations, it becomes even more important, in our view, that they receive the clearest possible political guidance.
A start was made with the Secretary-General's "Agenda for Peace" but more needs to be done.
UN operations continue to suffer from two major interrelated problems: a problem of doctrine (under what circumstances should the UN intervene?
how long should the UN stay?
and when should the UN withdraw?);
and a problem of resources (how can the UN get the necessary trained personnel, and how can it get the necessary funds?) 
It is essential that these problems be addressed if Canada is to continue to put its soldiers in harm's way in the service of peace.
As we heard at UN Headquarters, the UN has had to learn some hard lessons from the Balkans, Cambodia and Somalia, where it has been drawn increasingly into the uncharted territory of intervention in hitherto internal affairs and of reconstructing failed states and civil societies.
Financing peace operations is now the biggest budgetary challenge, exacerbated by the backlog of US. payments and the chronic lateness of Russian payments.
Arrears on peacekeeping contributions total US$3.2 billion.
And the present level of peacekeepers may represent the upper limit of what member states are prepared to contribute.
The UN cannot afford to do everything everywhere, and yet the UN has no agreed set of criteria to guide its decisions.
We think there is a pressing need to establish clear and consistent criteria for intervention and for "exit strategies" so that missions do not get bogged down indefinitely with no resolution.
Otherwise, there is a danger that the media will set the agenda (the CNN factor).
Experience has shown that the success of peace efforts depends most upon early involvement in a conflict, that advance planning is essential, that there must be a sufficiently clear concept for a political settlement of the underlying conflict, and that diplomatic efforts must be backed by credible force, and the will to use it.
Accordingly, we believe that a more concerted effort should be made to bring together suitable political, economic and military measures in an integrated continuum of "escalation management", with the emphasis on prevention rather than cure.
At each step, military force would be available, and economic sanctions would be planned, in support of the political or diplomatic efforts (e.g. preventive peacekeeping in support of preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping in support of diplomatic peacemaking, peace enforcement in support of conflict resolution).
The UN has no standing forces to dispatch to crisis hot spots.
It has therefore to reinvent the wheel for every emergency.
Long-time, distinguished UN officials such as Sir Brian Urquhart and Canadians such as Geoffrey Pearson contend that the only long-term solution is a UN standing force which would be readily available in time of crisis.
"Agenda for Peace'' advanced a more modest approach of voluntary special forces to be constituted for use in high-risk situations.
The Committee visited the United Nations and heard various proposals to improve the UN's ability to respond quickly to a crisis.
All proposals, however, must address the difficult obstacles of organization and control which UN member states are unlikely to resolve quickly.
To help overcome these serious problems, the Canadian government has announced it will conduct an in-depth review of the options available to strengthen the UN's rapid response capability.
Among these options is the possibility, over the long term, of creating a permanent UN military force.
The Committee supports the initiative to undertake this study, and hopes that its findings will assist the UN to develop a realistic and effective policy to deal with security crises.
A related question is whether the UN itself should try to manage directly all peace operations around the world.
In his "Agenda for Peace'' the Secretary-General advocated greater co-operation between the UN and regional organizations envisaged in Chapter VIII, Article 52 of the Charter.
In his view such co-operation could not only lighten the burden of the Security Council, but could also ``contribute to a deeper sense of participation, consensus and democratization in international affairs''.
In recent times the UN has in fact co-operated extensively with regional groups on specific problems: the Organization of African Unity and the League of Arab States on Somalia;
the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) on Cambodia;
the Organization of American States (OAS) on Nicaragua and El Salvador;
the European Union (EU), the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on the former Yugoslavia.
We believe this is a desirable trend.
Some regions, Europe in particular, are admittedly better equipped than others to take on this sort of responsibility.
The CSCE, at its meeting in Helsinki in July 1992, declared itself a "regional arrangement'' under the UN Charter and formally designated NATO as its peacekeeping and peacemaking arm.
The future evolution of both NATO and the CSCE are discussed below under "Euro-Atlantic Security''.
Other measures to reform peace operations, already proposed by Canada, should be pursued, including: 
* Improving political direction and control by the Security Council, and co-ordination among the Council, the Secretary-General and the troop contributing countries.
Specifically, troop contributing countries should be involved in, or at least consulted on, the diplomatic negotiations and political decisions accompanying the military operations.
* Strengthening the early warning capability of the Secretariat by providing it with the information and expertise necessary to make timely assessments of potential trouble spots.
The Secretariat's ability to co-ordinate large-scale peace operations should also be reinforced, but UN Headquarters should at the same time be encouraged to promote decentralization of authority to the elements in the field.
* Improving the training and promoting the standardization of the operating procedures of the contributed forces in order to enable them to operate together more effectively.
Canada is well placed to help train and equip peacekeepers from developing countries, and to promote co-ordination and interoperability in order to improve the reaction time and effectiveness of UN peace operations, where quality and timing are often more important than numbers.
BGen Forand, Commandant of CFB Valcartier, recommended the establishment of a training centre in Canada for the headquarters staffs of UN missions (21:13).
Minister of Foreign Affairs Ouellet announced recently at the UN General Assembly the opening of a centre for peacekeeping research and training in Nova Scotia.
We believe Canadians want Canada to continue its traditional peacekeeping role, but Canada can no longer afford to go everywhere and to participate in every UN peace operation.
Canada should resist pressures to become "the 911 of the international community,'' as Dan Middlemiss, of Dalhousie University, put it.
At present, as Denis Stairs observed, "the demand is too high, the expectations are too high, and our capacity to deliver is too low". (18:36).
We will therefore have to be more selective by establishing criteria which, flexibly applied, could facilitate the task of making choices.
There is already a list of criteria that are normally applied to Canadian participation in UN peace operations, the main ones being: 
* A clear and realistic mandate involving an acceptable level of calculated risk.
* Co-operation of the parties to the conflict and an agreed process for pursuing a long-term settlement.
* Readiness of member states to contribute to a representative force appropriate to the mandate.
* An effective UN command with clear lines of authority and adequate financial and logistic support.
* Agreement by all parties to Canadian participation.
These might be enlarged to encompass other considerations, such as the type of peace operation, the type of Canadian contribution, and the degree of Canadian interest involved.
In this way four clusters of considerations might be elaborated to help guide decision making with respect to Canadian participation in peace operations:
* Degree of difficulty (gravity of the conflict; feasibility of the mandate; degree of risk; co-operation of the parties; and support from the Security Council).
* Scope of the operation (type of operation, whether classical peacekeeping, or a "second generation'' operation, with civilian as well as military components, or peace enforcement;
the likelihood of a settlement; the type of Canadian contribution, whether a "vanguard'' force, or traditional military peacekeeping, or a mixed military-civilian contingent; and the expected length of the commitment).
* Operational efficiency (are the command arrangements effective, with clear lines of authority; is the financial and logistic support adequate; are the personnel resources available; and are the rules of engagement acceptable?).
* Canadian interests (relationship with the country or parties to the conflicts;
engagement of NATO or other organizations to which Canada belongs;
degree of threat to international order and security, as in the former Yugoslavia and Cambodia;
degree of humanitarian suffering, as in Somalia and Rwanda;
degree of challenge to democracy, as in Haiti; public opinion; and can Canada make a difference?).
The purpose of such criteria would be, not to put policy making into a rigid straitjacket, but to provide a guide to considerations which should be weighed in each case, in order to arrive at a policy which embodies the optimal combination of factors.
In this way, it should be easier for decision-makers to be consistent in accepting only those missions that meet essential standards for success, that can be seen to serve Canadian interests interpreted broadly, and that offer Canada the possibility of making a significant contribution.
On the other hand, we do not consider it realistic, on the basis of the evidence we have heard, for Canada to restrict its involvement in advance to so-called "low intensity'' operations, or predetermine the level of risk.
The spectrum of conflict is a continuum, from low to high intensity.
The majority of security challenges facing Canada for the foreseeable future may be low to medium intensity in nature, but low intensity conflict is just as dangerous to the individual soldier as higher intensity, and requires highly professional training.
What Canada can do is to choose when possible those operations which make best use of the things Canadians do best
highly professional military skills, air transport and traffic control, logistics, engineering and communications, medical teams, policing and civilian mediation).
It may be possible, for example, to combine elements of the "vanguard'' concept with elements of an enhanced civilian-military approach, so that Canada could help the UN to intervene swiftly, but could then contribute a smaller force to interface with civilian actors for the longer haul.
Such an approach would probably mean limiting Canadian involvement to fewer missions but with more significant participation in each.
In any case we recognize the need identified by John Watson, of CARE, for a rational division of labour and closer co-operation between three broad categories of participants in peace operations:
UN Headquarters and the forces in the field; multilateral organizations (such as UNHCR, World Food Program and UNICEF); and executing agencies (such as NGOs and voluntary aid agencies).
Among suggestions made to achieve this objective are a program of personnel secondments, a systematic exchange of information, and the establishment of an ongoing tripartite liaison body or roundtable to follow Canada's participation in emergency humanitarian operations.
The Committee favours the establishment of clear and consistent criteria for UN intervention, and a closer integration of political, economic and military measures at each step of any UN peace operation, with the emphasis on prevention.
It also favours strengthening the capability of the Secretariat to provide early warning and to co-ordinate the national force contributions and other participants in peace operations.
At the same time, it would welcome the decentralization of peace operations regionally where possible, so that if the Security Council decided that intervention was necessary, it could authorize a regional organization to undertake a specific operation under UN auspices.
The Committee believes that the primary international role of the Canadian Forces should be to support peacekeeping operations, but it recommends a more selective approach to Canadian involvement, based on an evaluation of the Canadian interests engaged and on criteria which would emphasize those capabilities and skills, both military and civilian, at which Canadians excel.
Training for UN peacekeeping operations should become a major thrust of Canadian policy.
Euro-Atlantic Security Europe and the transatlantic partnership are in a state of uncertainty and transition between the bipolar order of the Cold War and a new order, yet to be defined.
The requirement is no longer for collective defence of the West against the East, but rather for a collective security regime to protect peace-loving states against the unauthorized use of force to settle disputes.
Despite its Cold War origins, we believe NATO remains a key factor in European security.
It is a stabilizing force throughout the continent. It provides a multilateral framework for Germany's central role in Europe.
It helps to preserve the strategic balance in Europe, and guards against the emergence of a resurgent Russia from the ruins of the former Soviet Union, where 25 million Russians live in the newly independent states.
It is a bulwark against the "re-nationalization" of defence. And it is still the principal institution for transatlantic consultations.
We have been impressed with the substantial progress that NATO has made in transforming itself in response to the new requirements of the post-Cold War era.
It has redefined its strategy in terms of East-West partnership rather than confrontation, has adopted a new set of security functions emphasizing crisis management, and has modified its force structure accordingly.
The trend is toward smaller forces and reduced readiness, and toward four force categories: 
Immediate Reaction Forces (NATO Airborne Early Warning Force, the Allied Command Europe Mobile Force [Land] and [Air], and naval standing forces for the Atlantic, the Mediterranean and minesweeping);
Rapid Reaction Forces (Allied Command Europe), Rapid Reaction Corps, with air and naval forces drawn from the Immediate Reaction Forces);
Main Defence Forces (Europe-based land, sea and air forces organized in multinational formations); and Augmentation Forces (additional naval forces from North America, Portugal, and possibly France and Spain).
NATO has supported peacekeeping activities under the auspices of the CSCE and the UN in the Adriatic and the former Yugoslavia.
It is also working toward the concept of Combined Joint Task Forces for ad hoc operations which could include the forces of non-member countries.
Reaching out to the East, NATO has created the North Atlantic Co-operation Council (NACC), which includes all NATO members, former Warsaw Pact countries and the successor states of the Soviet Union, as a forum for security co-operation.
It has also concluded Partnership for Peace (PFP) agreements with most of those countries to provide joint planning, training and exercises in peacekeeping.
Canada strongly supports these moves.
The transatlantic link has been undergoing change, as the Europeans have emphasized the European Security and Defence Identity (ESDI).
At the January 1994 NATO summit, the relationship between the Western European Union (WEU), the military arm of the European Union, and NATO was more clearly defined.
NATO acknowledged that the WEU may wish to undertake operations independent of NATO, while the WEU accepted that NATO remained the policy making body for Euro-Atlantic security.
For Canada, this development cuts two ways: it enables the Europeans to take on more responsibility for their own security; but it contains the danger that, if the Europeans organize their security independently of NATO, they may encourage the disengagement of Canada and the United States.
It is therefore becoming increasingly important, but also increasingly difficult, to maintain the vitality of the transatlantic partnership.
Another product of the Cold War, the CSCE, has also been undergoing an important transformation.
Originally a "process" designed to further East-West détente on the basis of the Helsinki Final Act, it has been given institutions and expanded tasks in three areas: human rights, democracy and the rule of law;conflict prevention and crisis management; co-operative security, confidence building and arms control.
Its membership now includes Canada, the United States and 51 countries of Europe and Central Asia.
It is in a strong position to encourage norms for democratic governance and the treatment of minorities, aided by the High Commissioner for National Minorities.
At the same time, its diffuse membership makes it difficult to take the decisions necessary to implement such norms.
Nevertheless, CSCE Secretary-General Wilhelm Hoynck told the Committee in Brussels that, although consensus was needed to establish a mission to a regional hotspot, the mission could operate independently thereafter.
In our view NATO and the CSCE, each in its own way, have valuable assets.
NATO is the only international institution in existence with an integrated command structure, standardized operating procedures and standing forces available to support preventive diplomacy and peacemaking.
The CSCE, with its moral force, can act as a regional organization under the UN Charter and as a legitimizing agency for the use of military measures, if necessary, to implement UN decisions affecting European security.
They are complementary but need to work out a clearer division of labour between them and to develop still closer operational links with the UN, so that each can play the role for which it is best suited.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe appreciate NATO's stabilizing influence, in a situation where they find themselves in strategic limbo, and some would like to join the alliance.
They regard the NACC and PFP as interim solutions but realize that they are not yet ready to meet the requirements for full NATO membership.
NATO, for its part, is willing to accept new members in due course, but is not prepared for the time being to extend security guarantees to them beyond the assurance implicit in the commitment to consult with any active PFP partner that perceives a direct threat to its territorial integrity, political independence or security.
We believe there are cogent reasons for promoting partnership arrangements with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, but against drawing a new line across Europe at this time.
To do so would make it far more difficult to bring Russia into the process of building a new collective security regime to cover the whole of Europe, and could set the stage for a new confrontation with Russia.
As Jacques Lévesque, of the Université du Québec à Montréal, told us, to create the impression of a new cordon sanitaire around Russia would risk intensifying nationalistic tendencies among the Russians, who are already experiencing the dual humiliation of living in poverty and losing their empire.
Since the end of the Cold War, Canada has withdrawn its stationed forces from Europe and closed the two Canadian bases in Germany.
Canada's current commitments to NATO's four force categories are:
* Immediate Reaction Forces: a battalion group in Canada to serve with the ACE Mobile Force in Norway; aircrew aboard the NATO AEW aircraft; a destroyer or frigate to participate in the Standing Naval Force Atlantic.
* Rapid Reaction Forces: two squadrons of CF-18 fighter aircraft based in Canada; an air defence battery.
* Main Defence Forces: with no forces based in Europe, Canada does not contribute.
* Augmentation Forces: additional naval forces (11 destroyers and frigates, one supply ship, three submarines, 14 long range patrol aircraft and 25 helicopters) and a brigade group based in Canada.
Canada also contributes personnel to headquarters positions throughout the NATO command structure, funds to NATO common-funded infrastructure projects, and provision to NATO allies, on a cost recovery basis, of training facilities in Canada.
We believe the relatively modest expenditure involved in NATO membership represents a good investment.
The dividends include access to strategic information, exercises with allied forces, and entry into the most important allied councils.
Canada should be willing to pay the membership dues involved in having a voice and an ear at the deliberations of institutions that can affect its interests.
Everyone who spoke to the Committee in Brussels emphasized the importance of Canada's political and military role in the alliance, the high quality of its contributions to alliance consultations, and the value of Canada's peacekeeping experience.
The precise form of Canada's military contribution was less important than the fact that it continued to make one.
There was general acceptance of the Canadian decision to remove stationed forces from Europe, but irritation that it had been made unilaterally and without prior consultations.
If Canada now considered that some specialization in peace operations accorded best with Canadian national interests and priorities, that could probably be accommodated within NATO's overall plans.
The Committee considers that Canada should remain an active member of NATO.
At the same time, we should encourage NATO to continue moving to a collective security role for the whole of Europe, in co-operation with the Partnership for Peace participants.
In keeping with this approach, Canada should encourage a closer working relationship between NATO and the UN, and should restructure its assigned forces, in consultation with its allies, to better support NATO peacekeeping operations under UN or CSCE auspices.
It should also urge the CSCE to strengthen further those of its institutions that deal with conflict prevention and resolution, and the procedures that pertain to them, so as to enable them to take more timely and effective action.
North American Security Canada's defence relationship with the United States is the most important and extensive it has with any country.
It dates back to the eve of World War II, when the basic principle was laid down in reciprocal declarations by President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Mackenzie King, to the effect that the United States would not allow Canada to be threatened by an unfriendly power, and Canada would not allow the United States to be attacked through Canada.
The Ogdensburg and Hyde Park Declarations of 1940 and 1941 elaborated mechanisms for defence and defence production co-operation.
When Canada and the United States joined with the Europeans to found NATO in 1949, Canada-US. defence co-operation became a regional grouping within the alliance in form, but in practice it was kept quite separate.
When Canada joined with the United States to establish the North American Air (later Aerospace) Defence (NORAD) arrangement in 1958, it too operated separately.
Parallel to NORAD is the US. Unified Space Command, which has no Canadian participation but which uses information from NORAD to conduct active defence against ballistic missiles and space threats, not only against North America but world-wide (e.g. in the Middle East during the Gulf War).
The immediate aerospace threat to North America has been greatly reduced with the end of the Cold War, but NORAD is performing other functions, including general surveillance and interdiction of illicit drugs.
It also provides Canada with valuable strategic intelligence which it would not otherwise have.
The biggest uncertainty for the future concerns ballistic missile defence and the possibility (though not the probability) that the United States, now focusing on the risk of accidental launches or limited ballistic missile strikes from "rogue" states, may wish to integrate ballistic missile warning and defence in NORAD.
Such a move would raise questions of serious concern to Canada about the continued role of the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty, and about the militarization or "weaponization" of space.
Tariq Rauf, of the Canadian Centre for Global Security, stressed the importance of the ABM Treaty, "which has been crucial to Western security for over 20 years'', and argued that neither Canada nor North America was threatened by theatre ballistic missiles.
Another dimension of North American defence that deserves attention is its relationship with the protection of Canadian sovereignty and the control and defence of Canadian land, sea and air space.
These must of course remain the sole responsibility of Canada, and must rest on the military assets Canada is prepared to devote to the task.
We believe, however, that, in the increasingly high-tech world of today's and tomorrow's military operations, Canada can best meet those requirements if it works closely with the United States, and has access to the intelligence and technology that are available through NORAD.
As George Lindsey observed (44:33), continued co-operation with the United States will be essential if Canada is to remain in touch with future developments in military and space technology.
There is also much to be said for the integration of what are now separate, though co-operating, systems for military and civilian air traffic control and surveillance over Canada.
The Committee recommends that Canada be prepared to renew the NORAD agreement, but should press for a further shift of emphasis from air defence to global space surveillance.
Canada should require prior consultations on any move to abrogate the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty or to place weapons in space.
Western Hemisphere Security Canada became a full member of the Organization of American States (OAS) in 1984.
However, it specifically excluded participation in the inter-American security system, as incorporated in the Rio Treaty and Chapter 5 of the OAS Charter.
This approach reflected an historic hands-off attitude toward Latin American security matters.
Nevertheless, there has recently been a number of cases of Canadian involvement.
For the first time in history, Canadian troops were sent to Central America for the UN Observer Group and to the UN Observer Mission in El Salvador.
The Latin Americans, for their part, have been developing more dialogue and co-operation among themselves on regional security matters, and have also welcomed a more active UN role in their region.
Canada has proposed a series of initiatives on arms control to reduce the cost and size of armed forces and defence in the area.
It is also participating in annual conferences with armies, navies and air forces of the entire hemisphere.
Earlier this year, a workshop was held on Canadian-Mexican comparative perspectives on security.
Finally, Canada has launched the idea of a special OAS committee to discuss security issues.
In our view Canada is well placed to play a useful role in the OAS in an expanded security sense.
Hal Klepak, of the Canadian Foundation for the Americas, argued that "we have armed forces that are extremely professional and do not think about intervening in the domestic affairs of their country; we have enormous peacekeeping experience, which the Latin Americans are very interested in; and we have a human rights experience second to none...
we have no historical baggage...
so we are very well seen.
' (44:19) The Committee welcomes the efforts of Organization of American States (OAS) members to increase their co-operation on security matters within the broader UN framework.
It supports Canada's initiative to create a special OAS committee to discuss security issues.
Weapons Proliferation With the end of the Cold War and the rise of regional tensions, the build-up of high-tech conventional weapons as well as the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their associated technology have emerged as a matter of grave international concern.
The Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), which entered into force in 1970 and now has 156 signatories, is designed to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
As technology advances and becomes more widely available (to wit, today's lap top PC has more power than a main frame computer of the 60s), so the capacity to produce nuclear weapons is bound to spread, as the case of North Korea has dramatized recently.
On the other hand, it is significant that none of the nuclear "threshold" states has yet been prepared to admit to possession of a weapon, presumably for fear of triggering off-setting reactions by others.
At the same time, there is dissatisfaction among many non-nuclear weapons states that the declared nuclear weapons states have not gone as far as they could to reduce their nuclear arsenals, and in particular, have failed to agree on a comprehensive test ban.
This will probably not prevent the extension of the NPT when it comes up for renewal in 1995, but even if this is achieved, it will not in itself resolve the proliferation problem.
In these circumstances, we consider that reinforcement of the NPT regime must be combined with other international measures to discourage the acquisition of nuclear weapons by non-nuclear weapons states, measures that are applied consistently and that avoid rewarding potential proliferators.
In the last analysis, the international community must work toward a comprehensive test ban and an enforceable ban on the use of nuclear weapons.
The Committee welcomes the conclusion of the convention banning chemical weapons and looks forward to its early implementation.
As for conventional weapons, there is a consensus among the former Cold War adversaries on the need for a more systematic international approach to restrictions on sales, in order to prevent regional arms races and limit the consequences of regional instability.
Unfortunately, this has proved to be easier said than done.
In 1991, the UN General Assembly established the UN Register of Conventional Arms, which requested member states to provide data regarding certain categories of major weapons exports and imports.
There is no provision for verification but entries can be cross-checked to see if declared imports by one state tally with exports from others.
One problem is that not all member states report.
Another is that the Register does not require identification of specific types of weapons nor reporting of weapons produced domestically.
In particular, there is a pressing need for stricter controls over the import and export of land mines, which have sown such devastation, particularly among civilian populations.
According to official estimate, there are still 85-100 million active land mines around the world, and while each one costs only $8 to manufacture, it costs $600 to defuse.
It is the Committee's view that Canada should do everything possible, in co-operation with like-minded countries, to expand adherence to the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and to reinforce the NPT regime, to support indefinite extension of the Treaty, to press for further major reductions in the arsenals of the nuclear powers and to continue the campaign for a total nuclear test ban.
Canada should press for universal reporting to the UN Register of Conventional Arms, and should improve and expand the Register to include domestic procurement.
It should also advocate the prohibition of weapons sales to countries which do not report to the Register, as recommended by the Canadian Committee for the 50th Anniversary of the UN.
Special efforts should be made to control the production and the import and export of land mines.
Implications for the Canadian Forces The Committee heard a wide variety of views on the implications for the Canadian Forces of the changed, and changing, international security environment.
Some witnesses (e.g. Project Ploughshares) proposed a massive shift of resources from military preparedness to development assistance.
Others (e.g. the Conference of Defence Associations) advocated an increase in defence spending to achieve a high readiness general purpose combat capability.
The Canada 21 Council proposed a lightly armoured force structure designed to protect territorial sovereignty and to participate in common security missions under UN auspices, where high-intensity conflict is not a significant risk.
The Committee of 13 argued for a high level of military effectiveness in all three elements of the forces and for modernization of the army's equipment.
It is clear that the international security situation has changed and that Canada must take account of the changes.
There are many uncertainties, however.
There is no predictable military threat to Canada's security now, but the world has become more unpredictable.
In any case some Canadian forces are still needed to carry out domestic tasks.
On the international level there are no longer the same restraints on Canada's options, but today's decisions will set the shape of the armed forces 15-20 years hence.
And once a capability has been lost, it is costly and time consuming to build it up again.
Non-military solutions to disputes are clearly preferable to military solutions, but it is not yet realistic to think of a world without war.
It would therefore be prudent, as witnesses at NATO Headquarters told us, to ensure that we provide, in concert with our allies, flexible, multipurpose and combat ready forces to deal with future contingencies.
There are a number of options open, depending for one thing on the funding level.
Within the present budget envelope some adjustments would be possible, for example, by reducing the number of active air force fighter squadrons and using the savings to increase the manning level of some regular army units, or to increase naval support ships and strategic air lift.
Cuts to the present budget would be realized by producing a better balance between the operational and the support elements of the forces, by reducing overhead, surplus infrastructure, construction, R&D and project management.
Greater savings could be realized through selective reduction of sustainment and/or readiness.
According to security experts, still more drastic cuts would effectively restrict the forces to their domestic responsibilities, and would exclude any significant future participation in overseas operations, whether for the UN or for NATO.
Within the context of a reduced budget, consideration could also be given to the possibility of one or more specialization options.
For example, certain specialized elements, such as logistics, engineering, communications and medical units, might be strengthened in order to contribute additional units to peacekeeping operations, while other elements, that are less important to peacekeeping operations, or can be provided more readily by other countries, might be reduced.
Alternatively, sustainment and/or readiness might be reduced selectively in one or other of the arms of the Canadian Forces in order to strengthen another arm.
For example, the readiness of the army's three brigade groups could be maintained at current levels, or even enhanced, to meet the demands of the "vanguard'' concept, while reducing the sustainment and/or readiness of the air and naval forces.
A reasonable degree of specialization would in our view be consistent with what the Committee heard at NATO Headquarters.
We were told that NATO itself was moving toward a greater degree of specialization, in accordance with the requirements for smaller, more flexible and mobile forces for crisis management and peacekeeping.
We were told that Canada's work in peacekeeping was highly appreciated and that a Canadian specialization in peacekeeping within the evolving NATO framework would be welcome.
We think that such a focus deserves serious consideration.
In pursuing such an option, however, we should avoid fine-tuning defence capabilities to the point that "the wrong tools are in the bag'' when an unforeseen crisis arises.
The Committee believes that Canada's continued contribution to international security is essential, both for Canada's interest and for Canada's reputation as a respected member of the international community.
The Committee recommends that consideration be given to a more specialized configuration for the Canadian Forces, to better support peacekeeping operations.
The Committee cautions, however, against undue fine-tuning of Canadian Forces capabilities.
END
CHAPTER 3: BUILDING SHARED PROSPERITY The wealth, prosperity and well-being of all Canadians depend in a decisive fashion on international trade, on foreign investment, and on the financial arrangements that facilitate (or hinder) trade and investment.
While the environment in which these activities take place is to a very large extent shaped by others, the foreign economic policies of Canadian governments can determine largely how Canada interacts with that environment.
The wealth, prosperity and well-being of Canadians depend also on the well-being of others, in particular those who are the least advantaged and whose welfare is most threatened by poverty.
In other words, Canadians have told us that, as a people, we have not only interests, but also strongly held values which policy-makers must take into account and combine with our interests when devising the country's foreign economic policies.
These values include concern for advancing the status and participation of women, for the alleviation of poverty, for the quality of the environment world-wide, for the conditions under which working women and men labour, and last but not least, for the human rights of all people in the world.
The Challenges Accelerating globalization and integration are the hallmarks of the current international economic environment, as we pointed out in Chapter One of this report.
National sovereignty is being affected by open markets and the constraints imposed by international institutions and agreements (e.g. the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) regime).
Moreover, the rapid growth of trade and investment flows is outstripping the capacity of either national governments or international authorities to effect socially desirable outcomes.
Against this background, we see the United States, Europe and the Asian countries as the major forces modifying and shaping the environment in which international trade, investment and finance will have to be conducted in the near to medium future.
The United States remains the world's only military superpower and one of the three leading economic powers.
It has in the past been the outward-looking leader of the free world, and a resolute promoter of a broadly liberal world order.
With the end of the Cold War and the increasing pressure of domestic problems, however, the United States has become increasingly inward-looking and tempted by protectionism.
While the general international trend is toward greater limitations on national sovereignty in the interests of greater international co-operation, the United States, and particularly the Congress, seem to be insisting more frequently on deciding the rules unilaterally.
In this way the task of constructing a rules-based international economic order is made more difficult, and Canada in particular is faced with challenges in managing its trade relations with the United States.
The European Union (EU) is the dynamic core of a Europe that is growing in economic power and political confidence.
More and more candidates for membership are knocking on the door.
The EU already accounts for more trade and investment than any other area of the world, and the expected expansion into Central and Eastern Europe will create a market of 600 million people.
The potential for playing a major world role is there.
On the other hand, the "idea'' of Europe has not yet achieved practical expression in a degree of integration that would allow the Union to speak with one voice.
Its members are preoccupied with the building of their own institutions and with the tasks of both broadening and deepening the Union.
Hence the EU is not yet able to exercise the influence on the shape of the international trading system that its size, wealth, culture and traditions would indicate.
The rise of Asia is without doubt the most momentous event of the latter part of the 20th century.
Growth rates in much of the Asia-Pacific region during the 1980s were more than twice as high as the rest of the world.
With a population approaching 2.5 billion and an aggregate gross national income twice that of European Union, Asia- Pacific is of growing importance to Canada and to the global economy.
The Asia-Pacific Foundation reports that the region will hold 60% of the world's population, 50% of global production and 40% of total consumption by the end of the century.
Many countries, which not long ago followed an isolationist path, have liberalized their economies, allowed direct investment by foreign companies, and opened markets to the outside world.
The emergence of Japan as a world power has already been noted.
In addition, the newly industrializing economies such as Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan, but also Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand have been developing rapidly.
China, with a large population and high domestic savings and growth rates, is poised to become a major economic power.
India may be next.
All these countries are showing a tremendous capacity to absorb advanced production technologies and market forms of organization, and as a consequence have witnessed large secular gains in total factor productivity which are reflected in the production of high quality products retailing at very competitive prices.
How this plays out in future will depend in part on the way these countries relate to the emerging global trading arrangements of the new World Trade Organization (WTO).
Although it is impossible at this time to say what will happen eventually to Russia and to the surrounding countries whose long-range interests are, present acrimonies notwithstanding, closely tied to those of Russia, it is likely that that country will also become an important economic power.
In a multipolar world whose giants include the United States, China, Europe, Japan, Russia and possibly India, Canada's interests can be secure only if it works to develop its economic ties with all these partners.
Despite the efforts of trade negotiators since the mid-1980s, which have led to the recent entry into force of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and successful completion of the GATT Uruguay Round as a comprehensive "single undertaking", the Committee does not believe that a satisfactory finished framework for Canadian trade policy has now been achieved.
This is no time for complacency.
Indeed, Canadians should redouble their efforts, both domestically and internationally, to sharpen their competitive edge.
In addition, Canada needs to exercise vigilance and energy to counter adverse protectionist pressures, particularly those emanating from the United States.
This is important, not only to individual export sectors or firms, but to all Canadians concerned about jobs and social security.
The roundtables on Canada-US. relations and on trade issues, the submissions from the business community and from others who commented on international economic matters, have reinforced our view that there is difficult and complex work ahead: 
in ensuring that what has already been agreed is properly implemented;
in devising better international rules in contentious areas (e.g. antidumping and "fair" competition, environmental regulation, labour standards, human rights, etc.);
in remedying internal weaknesses which hinder diversified trade development; and in making trade and broader foreign policy objectives mutually supportive.
In that regard, the challenges are both immediate and longer term.
In this chapter we shall proceed as follows:
we shall distinguish, first, between trade and investment, on the one hand, and finance, on the other.
We are well aware that there are close relationships between these phenomena but we believe the distinction increases clarity.
We shall, secondly, distinguish between the short and the longer term.
This too is an artificial distinction because, in a way, we are always in the short term and because policy-makers are by the force of circumstances almost always controlled by short term agendas.
However, the distinction allows us to put urgent problems ("putting our own economic house in order", improving the trade development performance, and dealing with US. trade remedy laws) in the context of longer term objectives 
(reaffirming a liberal, multilateral rules-based economic order; and creating and promoting an international outlook for Canadian business) 
and thus helps us choose the short term options that have the greatest long term value.
**The Longer Term Trade and Investment Agenda For the government's longer term agenda we see two fundamental items of business: reaffirming the priority of a liberal, multilateral rules-based economic order; and creating and promoting an international orientation for Canadian business.
Both must be tackled without delay and maintained as a priority over the long term if the future well-being of Canadians, and Canada's economic role in the world, are to be preserved.
Both flow from the immediate problems we have examined.
A rules-based multilateral system remains the best protection for Canada against being side-swiped by the "big boys on the block".
Specifically, it offers a way of restraining the United States, and of enhancing Canada's bargaining power in its unequal relationship with its neighbour.
More generally, a rules-based multilateral economic order offers the surest way to achieve the optimum allocation of resources world-wide.
It is indeed the only way to ensure that the benefits of trade and capital formation, with their accompanying technological spin-offs, reach the poorer parts of the world.
Needless to say, the barriers that rich countries like Canada have erected against the exports of developing countries have done nothing to further that objective.
This is an area in which, as the North-South Institute argued persuasively, more could be done to liberalize access of developing countries to Canadian markets as a development tool.
Another feature of globalization -- the growing mobility of capital -- has important implications for such matters as environmental and labour standards and social services.
These are public policies and programs that cost governments and taxpayers money and that thus enter into commercial calculations of the cost of doing business.
Other things being equal, capital is likely to go where such costs are lowest.
It is in multilateral institutions and negotiations that such concerns can be brought forward, and efforts made to moderate this natural "race to the bottom".
The aim instead should be to work towards a gradual movement of policies and standards in an upward direction (not necessarily towards complete harmonization or convergence), and to do so in the least trade-restricting manner possible so as to avoid creating new pretexts for protectionism.
It is far from clear what shape the new multilateral order will take in the field of trade and investment.
At the last G-7 summit meeting in Naples the United States made the welcome proposal that its members, fresh from the success of the Uruguay Round, undertake a further track of trade liberalization among themselves (the "Open Markets 2000" proposal) thereby initiating an "Uruguay plus" round.
The G-7 agreed only to a much weaker formula of continuing the "momentum" of liberalization.
At the same time, there is considerable debate about the future agenda of the new WTO as and when it is established (it is scheduled to supersede the GATT next year).
It will presumably deal with tariff reductions and the questions of trade remedies and competition policy; but how will it deal with other items of unfinished business, including further reduction in agricultural export subsidies, government procurement, environmental and labour standards, and the question of new members?
In this latter connection, the main candidate is China, which has been negotiating to rejoin GATT as a developing country,
but which is being asked to fulfil all GATT conditions, including bringing its tariffs and trade practices into line with GATT provisions, plus meeting acceptable labour standards.
These are among the issues on which Canada must prepare positions for the meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) Forum in Jakarta in November, and the Miami "Americas Summit" of all democratic leaders of the Western Hemisphere in December.
To enhance Canada's long-term trading position globally, the Committee recommends that: 
the government should reaffirm the principle of a rules-based multilateral system as the preferred option for Canadian trade policy, 
should ensure that existing bilateral and regional trading arrangements are complementary to mulilateral objectives, 
and should carefully consider the implications for present and future multilateral trading arrangements of entering into any new bilateral or regional negotiations;
Canada should work with others to ensure that the new World Trade Organization (WTO) operates in a way that is genuinely universal and multilateral, with the widest possible membership consistent with generally accepted standards;
Canada should urge that the WTO give early attention to such items as agricultural export subsidies, the environment and labour standards,
and above all the general question of trade remedies,
and the particular question of the worrisome proliferation of antidumping actions;
Canada should take advantage of opportunities in all forums to pursue the principle of broader rules-based trade liberalization.
While emphasizing the essential importance of multilateralism, we must at the same time recognize the growing reality of regionalism, for Canada is involved in a process of economic integration in North America and regional pressures are bound to become stronger in the Western hemisphere.
This trend received its original impetus from the absence of the service sector from GATT negotiations (before the Uruguay Round) and the desire of the United States, the European Union and other industrialized countries to get at trade and services and access to service markets through foreign direct investment.
Regional arrangements like Europe 1992, the EC-EFTA Agreement, the Australian-New Zealand Agreement and NAFTA followed, and influenced the GATT agenda.
That also led snowball-like to new negotiating items such as trade-related intellectual property rights (TRIPs) and trade-related investment measures (TRIMs).
In the Americas regional groupings have multiplied (MERCOSUR, CARICOM, the Andean Group and the group of three) as countries have realized the potential for economic growth inherent in the mutual opening of markets among neighbouring or like-minded countries.
Meanwhile, the question arises whether NAFTA should remain restricted to Canada, Mexico and the United States, whether it should be expanded to include other countries of the Americas, or even the Pacific Rim, or whether members of NAFTA should negotiate their own bilateral trade agreements with non-members.
In line with our recommended emphasis on multilateralism, it would clearly be preferable if regional free trade were expanded by way of accession of new members to NAFTA.
Otherwise the hemisphere might become a patchwork of bilateral arrangements, perhaps inviting new US. demands, and the gains achieved through NAFTA -- the dispute settlement mechanism and the side agreements on environmental and labour standards -- might be undermined.
On the other hand, NAFTA itself will remain to a considerable extent in practice a "hub and spoke" arrangement as long as the Canada-Mexico side of the triangle is so weak.
Moreover, Mexico is now growing rapidly.
But at the same time, Mexico has already been pursuing limited bilateral agreements with several other Latin American countries, and there is nothing to stop the United States doing the same, if it decides it is in its interest to do so.
Consequently, Canada should not foreclose any of its own trade options, and should pursue bilateral opportunities to strengthen trade ties in the Americas, but within a context of "open regionalism".
Given Canada's involvement in regional trade, the Committee recommends that Canada should follow a two-track policy of supporting the expansion of NAFTA through the accession of new members,
and at the same time strengthening its political and economic presence in Latin America and developing trade relations with Mexico and with other selected trading partners.
Canada must also be an active player in the dynamic Asia-Pacific region.
We must develop our strengths and think both in the short and long-term.
As part of this effort, bilateral and multilateral economic and trade arrangements with countries in the Asia-Pacific region will need to be examined in the light of the major economic changes taking place.
The Committee also recognizes that an increasingly important element in Canada's trade and economic relations with the Asia-Pacific region will be the development of new institutions such as the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) Forum.
APEC, like the region's explosive growth, is a relatively recent phenomenon.
But since its creation five years ago, it has become the region's main forum for discussion of economic interdependence, the multilateral trading system, and the reduction of barriers to trade in goods, services and investment.
It has also become a major vehicle for co-operation on sectoral issues, such as environmental protection.
We recommend that the government pursue trade opportunities actively in the Asia-Pacific region.
Success will depend upon Canada's ability to achieve greater market access and to develop initiatives that result in the greatest comparative advantage to Canadian exporters.
Creating and promoting an international orientation for business in Canada should in our opinion be a priority objective of both governments and the private sector in any longer term Canadian strategy to meet the challenges of globalization.
Building such an orientation involves making awareness of foreign markets, and their related linguistic and cultural features, an integral part of business development, and specifically in regard to developing the potential of SMEs.
It also involves investing in two closely related objectives:
* increasing the knowledge that foreigners have of Canada;
and * increasing the knowledge that Canadians have of the outside world.
Some knowledge will be transmitted through the market but it will not be enough nor properly distributed for Canada's long-term interests.
Government assistance is called for in a number of areas, for example, to stimulate greater efforts in science and technology that will provide the knowledge basis for future international trade success.
This is a key dimension that needs to be reflected more in Canada's trade representation.
We heard compelling testimony from those engaged in education, research and development indicating their desire to become more involved in this effort.
Another area to be strengthened is perhaps the most effective potential marketing tool of all: the diffusion of arts, culture and education, 
which can not only make Canada better known abroad and stimulate others to make themselves better known here, but can also generate a climate of mutual understanding and trust on which long-lasting commercial relations can be built.
It is a well-tested practice that many of our competitors use to great advantage.
There are numerous instruments available for such a policy.
Canadian ministerial-level trade delegations could on occasion be accompanied by renowned artists or artistic groups whose reputation abroad is often greater than the members from government or business.
Creative artists could be invited to participate in trade fairs abroad.
Scholarships could be used to encourage the exchange of academics and students.
Canadian colleges and universities could be encouraged to develop courses, workshops and other activities designed to teach Canadians about economic opportunities abroad 
(along the lines of a government sponsored program in Japan that brings students from TNCs to study there, with the guarantee that they will have a job with the sponsoring TNC upon graduation).
There could also be closer co-operation between Canadian cultural centres abroad and trade promotion programs.
As the Committee heard repeatedly, a frequent obstacle to exploring and penetrating foreign markets, especially for Canadians, is an insufficient attention to foreign languages and a lack of knowledge of foreign cultures.
Yet Canada has a large and growing pool of people who are bilingual in English and French and who are familiar with a wide variety of other languages and cultures.
More should be done to make use of that resource, and to promote the learning of foreign languages and cultures, especially in business schools and faculties of business management.
It goes without saying that a program to create and promote an international orientation for business in Canada must be built on a home base of arts, culture and education that is strong and vibrant, and an effective strategy for promoting those products abroad.
The federal government can provide leadership, but the co-operation of the provinces is essential, given their areas of jurisdiction and their international activities in this field.
We will deal in greater detail with this matter in Chapter 6.
Here we wish to underline the importance of these elements for the strengthening of Canada's capacities as a truly international trading nation.
The Committee recommends that the government develop, as part of an overall integrated trade strategy, a long-term plan for creating and promoting an international orientation for business in Canada, in co-operation with interested provincial governments.
Academic and cultural institutions, as well as the business community should also be involved in this strategy.
We further recommend that the government seek a shared commitment with the provinces on a plan to create exchanges, scholarships and other programs designed to develop a new class of outward-looking Canadian entrepreneurs.
Trade Linkages In contrast to the concept of non-discrimination, which since World War II has been embodied in the "most favoured nation" (MFN) principle,
the Committee has heard a large number of voices advocating that Canada and other countries should attach normative conditions to trading relationships
-- in effect, should discriminate in their trade against countries which violate human rights, are careless with the environment, abuse women and children, or suppress labour.
The brief of the Canadian Labour Congress urged Canada to "incorporate workers' rights clauses in its bilateral trading arrangements and play a leading role in the promotion of a social or workers' rights clause in the new WTO".
The joint submission by the labour development funds of four national unions called on Canada to "explore the options for attaching labour rights criteria to its provision of trade benefits to trading partners within the general system of preferences''.
There are two sets of consideration here:
short term, countries that behave in this way should feel the full weight of censure and action of the international community;
longer term, trade, exchanges and dialogue will promote political reform and respect for human rights.
Trade sanctions may be effective in certain cases against serious abuses, but only when applied by a decisive majority of the trading partners, as happened with South Africa.
In general, however, we think that Canada can best influence other countries in a positive direction by dealing with them openly, by making our views known in a clear and frank way through dialogue.
The messages we received from Amnesty International and other members of the Network on International Human Rights deserve serious consideration in this regard.
There is a range of steps which can be taken short of punitive threats and sanctions.
It is also important that we be consistent in the application of our principles, beginning by applying them at home.
Moreover, working in concert with friends is always more effective than working alone.
As soon as the WTO is established, Canada should bring to that body's attention to not only the trade linkage issues mentioned above, 
but also the problems associated with trade and investment that arise when higher yields attract capital to places where there is little in the way of social or environmental programs.
A laisser-faire approach to these matters would too easily permit an unfair competitive advantage to countries that violate universal norms of human rights, 
make use of prison labour, subjugate women and children, and resist the introduction of international labour standards for which there is already a broad multilateral basis 
through the International Labour Organization).
An absence of good multilateral rules could lead to an erosion of programs crafted to improve the human condition, due simply to the pressures of trying to retain capital that would otherwise leave.
In the end, it is the very survival of our trading relationship that is at stake.
For if countries do not respect the universal human rights of their citizens, there is reason to be uneasy about their respect for the rights of foreigners investing or trading with them.
Accordingly, the Committee, in agreement with the strongly-expressed values of Canadians, recommends that the Government of Canada should use whatever channels may be most effective to protest abuses of human rights, labour standards and/or environmental protection, whenever they occur,
and should work closely wherever practical with other partners to bring about an amelioration of these situations in a manner compatible with the orderly evolution of a rules-based multilateral trading system.
The use of trade sanctions in a multilateral context should be considered in appropriate circumstances.
International Finance The international financial institutions (IFIs) -- the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
-- that were created at Bretton Woods in 1944 and set up in the immediate post-war period, have evolved in unexpected ways over the last half century.
Increasingly serious questions are being asked about the future of the system and the structures and roles of today's "family" of IFIs -- the IMF, the World Bank Group, regional development banks, and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS).
This is hardly surprising, since the global environment in which they operate has been transformed, as we have already pointed out.
Capital has become infinitely more mobile, growing interdependence has brought new pressures for international co-operation,
multilateral institutions have multiplied, and governments have been joined by a variety of non-governmental actors on the international scene. The IFIs have responded by adjusting their mandates.
Most visibly, they have grown in size and organizational structure.
The IBRD, which quickly shifted its focus from post-war Europe to the developing world, has become part of the current World Bank Group, 
which also includes the International Development Association, the International Finance Corporation and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency.
We have heard numerous complaints about the IFIs.
For many they have become bureaucratic and undemocratic behemoths which are not sufficiently accessible, open or accountable and which operate in a world of their own, 
largely insulated from competitive discipline and the concerns of ordinary people.
In particular, there is dissatisfaction with the lack of sensitivity to such concerns and of public transparency in the procedures used to design and apply structural adjustment policies.
Some of the criticism has been harsh, and reflects a loss of public confidence, which threatens to undermine Canadians' support for multilateral institutions generally.
The North-South Institute reflected that concern in a detailed set of reform proposals which it submitted to the Committee.
It mentioned the need to "curb administration costs, improve accountability structures, raise participation by developing countries, and promote pro-poor policies".
(Key Issues for Canada's Foreign Policy, p. 25.) 
We agree that this is a matter that needs to be addressed as a priority.
The Bank and the Fund are of course accountable to their 170-plus member governments, but more specifically to the mostly richer and more powerful governments represented on their boards of governors.
That accountability is not to parliaments directly, and even less therefore to citizens.
The boards of governors operate on the basis of weighted voting corresponding to the contributions of the respective countries to the organizations' working capital.
However, the present allocation no longer corresponds to relative economic weight.
There is also no doubt the accountability procedures have left something to be desired in the past, although the Bank and the Fund, to a lesser extent, have made serious efforts to improve them in recent years.
These steps, such as the World Bank's Inspection Panel, should be encouraged and strengthened.
Nevertheless, there is probably room for more transparency,
and one way of achieving that would be for Canada's executive directors for the Bank and Fund, as well as the Regional Development Banks, to appear on a more regular basis, perhaps once a year, before the Foreign Affairs and Finance Committees of Parliament.
More broadly, we think the time has come for a thorough review of all the activities of the IFIs, and of their respective roles in contributing to multilateral goals.
Such a review should be open to all interested parties, governmental and non-governmental, and should make an effort to take into account the concerns of those affected by the IFIs' operations.
We will have more to say below about proposals to reform the Bretton Woods system.
Another question that has been raised with the Committee is the relationship of the IFIs with the UN system.
While the Bank and the Fund are formally part of that system, they are not subject to review by the Economic and Social Council or the General Assembly of the UN, the way the specialized agencies are, and this is a subject of complaint by some.
On the other hand, it is questionable whether it would serve the interests of efficient and responsible management to subject the IFIs to UN direction, or whether it would merely tend to politicize their operations.
We have no solution, but agree that better co-operation and coherence among UN agencies and those of the Bretton Woods system, including in future the WTO, is a desirable long-term goal.
Proposals such as that of the North-South Institute for a "Global Economic Council" are at least worth exploring.
As a respected middle power with a seat on all the IFI boards, Canada is well placed to put forward some creative ideas in this regard.
As already indicated, the question of reform of the Bretton Woods institutions has recently become a lively subject of public debate.
Originally the responsibilities assigned to the Bank and the Fund were quite different, though they were recognized as complementary and needed co-ordination.
The Fund was assigned three basic responsibilities:
to encourage countries to adopt currency convertibility;
to co-ordinate a system of pegged but adjustable exchange rates;
and to assist countries with temporary balance of payments difficulties.
Over the years, it has shifted its support from fixed to flexible exchange rates.
In dealing with ensuing financial crises, particularly in developing countries, the Fund has stressed the adoption, by members experiencing severe balance of payments difficulties,
of stringent macroeconomic stabilization measures and longer term structural adjustment programs to deal with currency problems and capital flight among major impediments to restoring a country to financial health.
The Bank's main responsibility was, and remains, the lending of funds to governments of developing countries that cannot borrow on the world capital market what they need.
To ensure that the loans are repaid, the Bank has been increasingly drawn into reinforcing the Fund's disciplines, making a considerable proportion of its lending conditional on the adoption of structural adjustment programs.
On a positive note, the Bank has been learning some hard lessons from this experience; 
while aid volumes have dropped, private capital flows to developing countries have recovered, and total financial resources reaching them have attained record levels.
We see a need to revisit these questions.
Formally, the main difference of mandate between the Fund and the Bank has been that the former is called in to deal with financial emergencies, while the latter is mainly concerned with long-term development.
On the basis of the views it has heard, however, the Committee believes that there should be a clearer distinction drawn between the functions of the Bank and the Fund,
with the Fund refocussing more of its attention on surveillance of the fiscal performance of the G-7, and on the need for macroeconomic discipline and adjustments globally, not just by developing countries.
The Bank, for its part, should continue to improve its capacity to take better account of social and environmental costs in designing structural adjustment programs where these continue to be necessary.
In that regard, it should take seriously the contribution of non-governmental organizations to issues of equitable, democratic and sustainable development.
To reduce misunderstandings and mistrust, both institutions could benefit by becoming more accessible through dialogue and appeals mechanisms.
In Washington, the Committee heard as well about various proposals that have been made for institutional reform.
These include:
installation of a system of target zones for the exchange rates of major currencies, managed through the IMF;
more extensive international co-operation to regulate and supervise financial markets, through the IMF;
sharply expanded institutional arrangements regarding international direct investment, either through the WTO or a new World Investment Organization;
and substantial expansion of the role of regional organizations (including APEC).
Although some of these proposals, in particular the idea of target zones, may not prove feasible, they will have to be carefully analyzed in the lead-up to the next G-7 summit in Halifax.
Despite Canada's place as host of the next summit, there has been some suggestion that Canada has lost influence in the G-7.
In the position paper prepared for the Committee, Sylvia Ostry attributed this suggestion to "Canada's limited economic performance and its limited presence in the global economy".
For this reason she recommended that Canada should regain the initiative by launching a plan of incremental change in the G-7 consisting of:
a comprehensive security agenda (aid, environment, trade/investment, defence, and economic policy co-ordination) for summits;
links between the OECD, the Bank, the Fund and the WTO;
a new approach to responsibility sharing and to assigning specific topics to specific countries;
and a procedure to monitor performance by member countries, involving specialized ministers.
In addition, the Committee shares the view that the international financial and capital markets need some form of international supervision.
The way they operate now, they are grossly destabilizing and totally beyond the capacity of governments to regulate.
To resolve this increasingly serious problem will require a high degree of co-ordination of national policies and agreement on the most appropriate institution to invest with responsibility in this field.
The IMF is a possible candidate, provided it is reformed.
Another possible measure would be a tax on foreign exchange transactions.
We will not attempt here to assess the merits of these and other suggestions put forward in various forums,
but we do believe it is in Canada's interest to enter this debate and to make its voice heard in the multilateral discussions which will be taking place on institutional reform and the strengthening of global economic "good governance".
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the government, in preparing its approach to the question of reform of the Bretton Woods system in the run-up to the Halifax summit of the G-7, should develop a strategy, involving the World Trade Organization and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) as well as the international financial institutions, designed to maintain a proactive Canadian role in working toward a rules-based global economy.
This strategy should be tabled in Parliament and considered by the appropriate standing committees.
The Committee recommends further that any review of the operations of the international financial institutions should be comprehensive and should include the question of a clear division of labour between the World Bank and the Fund, as well as their relations with other institutions such as the regional development banks.
The review should focus particular attention on making their operations more efficient, transparent, accountable and responsive to issues of human rights, social equity, environmental sustainability and public input.
To strengthen this process for Canadians, the Committee recommends that the responsible Canadian ministers as well as Canada's executive directors of the Bank and the Fund and the regional development banks be invited to appear once a year before the parliamentary committees on foreign affairs and finance to report on the activities of these institutions.
Finally, the Committee also wishes to respond briefly to the large amount of testimony on the issue of developing country debt.
Several parliamentary committee reports in both Houses have explored this question since the previous foreign policy review, the last in 1990.
As we noted earlier, there has been a strong recovery in private capital flows to developing countries in recent years.
The financial picture is brighter for most countries outside Africa.
However, we acknowledge that the accumulated stock of debt is enormous, and that for some low-income countries, notably in Sub-Saharan Africa, the debt crisis is far from over.
These are also countries which may benefit least from global trade liberalization and which are afflicted by many other problems.
While Canada has already responded with some positive debt relief measures, the Committee concludes that consideration should be given to further measures, bilateral and multilateral, to alleviate the continuing debt crisis of the poorest countries, notably in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Such measures should not, however, be at the expense of funds for long-term development aid.
CHAPTER 4: SHARING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT Canadians care deeply about the environment.
It touches at the heart of our identity, our relationship with a vast landscape, our traditional reliance on a resource-based economy, and in many respects our way of life.
The Committee heard a lot about the importance of sustainable development.
From northern communities, the Committee received disturbing evidence on the rise of health problems from transboundary pollution.
Wrenching testimony on the state of the oceans and high seas fisheries made a lasting impression.
For many of the witnesses who appeared before the Committee, it was increasingly apparent that environmental impacts were reaching a global scale and affecting the lifestyles, well-being and future prospects of all Canadians.
The holes rent in the ozone layer, growing evidence of climate change from greenhouse gases, the pollution of our land, waters and skies, and the accelerated destruction of biodiversity and key ecosystems, are compelling an awareness of the international dimensions of our everyday lives.
There is ample evidence that the general goal of sustainable development -- "meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs" -- is now firmly rooted in the Canadian consciousness.
The special attachment of Canadians to sustainable development has been shaped by many factors:
our sometimes checkered experience in managing one of the world's largest natural resources bases;
our long-standing efforts to promote solutions to transboundary problems such as acid rain and the clean-up of the Great Lakes,
our role in building an international consensus on environment and development;
the dynamic work of hundreds of Canadian non-governmental organizations world-wide;
the international contributions of writers and broadcasters such as Farley Mowat and David Suzuki;
and the leadership of individual Canadians such as Maurice Strong, Jim MacNeill and Elizabeth Dowdeswell.
The Committee sensed -- from youth groups, environmental organizations, communities and business associations -- that protecting the environment was an expression of our fundamental values.
We were struck by the degree of consensus across different sectors of society on the importance of integrating environmental sustainability with economic and social decisions, and the potential this had to unify Canadians in a common cause.
The stakes are clear.
As Jim MacNeill described to us in Winnipeg, the world is still rushing headlong away from environmental sustainability.
Our societies are being maintained only through the exhaustion of a one-time inheritance of natural resources.
Population pressures, mass poverty and pollution are no longer local phenomena.
They cross borders and threaten our security, our health and our economic prospects.
Eco-disasters like the Exxon Valdez, Chernobyl and Bhopal are now household words.
The burning of the rainforests is etched in the minds of even the very young.
The political and strategic impact of security threats caused by environmental breakdown constitutes an important foreign policy issue.
Canadians recognize that sustainability must involve collective responsibility.
We can no longer protect our environment, our livelihood and our well-being without international co-operation.
Conversely, we cannot be effective unless we tackle the challenges of sustainable development at home.
We are still faced with a situation where 20% of the world's population consumes 80% of the world's resources.
We cannot push for international reductions in greenhouse gases while doing nothing about our toxic emissions in Canada.
This is not only a question of credibility or mortgaging our future.
More and more decisions about what we produce, how we produce it and what we can trade are being governed by international decision making. Our forest industries know this only too well.
There is an urgent need to develop common rules on trade and the environment, in order to moderate the natural "race to the bottom'' that we talked about in Chapter 3 and to protect Canada against the tendency to use the environment as a pretext for erecting protectionist trade barriers.
The Conference Board of Canada talked about sustainable development as a great challenge, but also a great opportunity.
There was broad support for the positive relationship to be developed between the environment and the economy.
More and more business leaders are persuaded that Canadian excellence in environmental technology and the perception of Canada as a leader in this area can open new markets for Canadians and can play a key role in our competitiveness.
The National Roundtable on the Environment and the Economy captured a conviction shared by all members of the Committee:
By focusing on the mutually rewarding relationship between the economy and the environment, sustainable development can thus orient foreign policy toward maximizing job creation at home, while expressing Canadians' profound sense of community and custodianship vis-à-vis the outside world.
We are encouraged by recent plans to promote Canada's environmental industry at the international level.
As environmental impacts reach a global scale, we know that the efforts of one country, acting alone, can do little to help.
In the wake of the 1992 Earth Summit in Brazil, the basics of an international system of rules and institutions on sustainable development are beginning to emerge.
Global conventions on ozone, biodiversity, climate change and toxic waste are now joining a growing body of international agreements on environment and development.
Progress is being made even in sensitive areas such as population, as evidenced by the recent population conference in Cairo.
International commitment has flagged however since the high point of the Earth Summit.
There is an urgent need to regain political momentum if further progress is to be made.
We need to take full advantage of upcoming multilateral negotiations such as the UN Social Summit and the UN Women's Conference in Beijing.
Sylvia Ostry of the University of Toronto described sustainable development as "the most important transformative question in this century"(6:8).
In its brief to the Committee, the National Roundtable on the Environment and the Economy stated that: [Canada] needs a thematic focus, and philosophical basis, to identify new opportunities and direct the difficult choices to be made.
The concept of sustainable development provides such a focus and foundation.
It offers an integrating purpose, backed by popular appeal and national power, to define Canadian foreign policy in the 1990s.
The Committee is convinced that sustainable development is of key importance as an overarching foreign policy theme. In our view, all major aspects of foreign policy come into play.
Sustainable development is important to the well-being of individual Canadians, and to our national, regional and global security.
It is fundamentally linked to our trade and economic relations. It is part of the identity that we project abroad.
It is the basis for our development co-operation.
Roundtables and other consultative mechanisms have demonstrated that the interests of business, governments, indigenous groups and NGOs can be bridged.
We must build on these coalitions and ensure that talk shifts to concerted action.
Sustainable development is sparking new alliances and new approaches to common problems. This is especially important at a time when fiscal pressures are at odds with the growing costs of meeting Canada's international environmental obligations.
The Committee believes that we need to maintain a proactive approach to sustainable development in our foreign policy.
We recommend the following items be included on the foreign policy agenda:
To strengthen the capacity of bilateral, regional and multilateral institutions to address sustainable development, and to make these institutions more efficient and accountable.
To strengthen the linkage between trade and sustainable development through the World Trade Organization.
We are confident that clear international standards and accepted rules can make a significant contribution to sustainable development while minimizing the current tendency to use the environment as an excuse to erect protectionist trade barriers.
The International Institute for Sustainable Development has produced a useful set of principles to guide further work in this area.
To foster mechanisms to ensure the close co-ordination of domestic and international policies on sustainable development, including the development of action-oriented consultative mechanisms with stakeholders.
To accord priority status to the implementation of the environmental industries strategy.
To pursue the sustainable development agenda agreed at the Earth Summit in Rio, including the implementation of global environment conventions and the development of further agreements related to forestry, fisheries and the circumpolar region.
To ensure that relevant foreign policies are assessed for their potential impact on sustainable development.
To address the linkages between sustainable development, poverty, democracy and governance.
Working from the position that the principles underlying foreign policy should be practised at home, we turn in the next two sections to policies related to the oceans and the arctic.
Arctic Policy The end of the Cold War has opened up possibilities for co-operation among the countries of the arctic region that did not previously exist.
For the first time it has become possible to think in circumpolar terms, of East-West collaboration among northern countries and peoples sharing similar experiences and challenges.
In Yellowknife we were told of plans to open an office of the Northwest Territories government in Yakutsk (a city in northern Russia over 6000 km from Moscow),
concrete evidence of new relationships that are developing in the Arctic.
Important preliminary work has been undertaken in recent years by the Inuit Circumpolar Conference, which has been developing co-operative programs in the areas of agriculture, health and education.
More generally, the Committee heard impressive testimony from indigenous peoples' organizations confirming their desire to play a stronger role in developing, in particular, the northern dimension of Canada's international policies.
As a result of the enhanced prospects, a proposal has surfaced to form an Arctic Council that would build on the success of the Inuit Circumpolar Conference and comprise all of the countries facing the Arctic ocean, namely Canada, Greenland (through Denmark), Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Russia and the United States.
The initial area for its work, and the one which gives urgency to its formation, is the environment.
The unusually fragile ecosystem is already being threatened by airborne pollution carried from Europe and Russia, which takes the form of Arctic haze.
Potentially more serious is the dumping over the years by the former Soviet government of radioactive waste and even parts of reactors into the rivers that drain into the arctic and into the ocean directly.
Canada should continue to press the United States to join the Council, whose main work initially would be to develop uniform policies and programs for addressing the threats to the environment.
We recommend that the government work urgently with other states to establish the Arctic Council. One of the first priorities of the Council should be to deal with threats to the Arctic environment.
The government has appointed Mary May Simon, the founder of the Inuit Circumpolar Conference, as Circumpolar Ambassador.
The Committee approves this appointment.
Ambassador Simon should be well placed to reinforce Canadian sovereignty over Arctic waters and to develop co-operative relations among the countries in the region, which should include the promotion of circumpolar trade.
The indigenous peoples of the Canadian North face a special problem as a result of actions by the European Union and the United States;
specifically the European Union has banned the import of furs of wild animals because of objections to leg-hold traps and the United States has enacted the Marine Mammals Protection Act with similar effect.
In addition the Migratory Birds Convention, to which Canada and the United States are both parties, was also a subject of complaint.
Representatives of indigenous peoples told the Committee that these measures had affected them, reducing the income that they could earn from furs as well as limiting their capacity to live off the land.
We believe that exploring the possibility of securing relief for aboriginal peoples from these measures could be an early task of the Circumpolar Ambassador.
We also suggest that Canadian Parliamentarians participating in meetings with representatives of the European Parliament and in meetings of the Canada-US Inter-Parliamentary Group should pursue these matters with their colleagues.
CHAPTER 5: RENEWING INTERNATIONAL AID
Step One -- Clarify the Mandate At the Roundtable on Development Assistance, Phillip Rawkins stated: 
the single most important thing the Committee can contribute would be a recognition that for the Canadian development assistance program to operate effectively, it needs a clear, tight and precise mandate.
In general, we agree with those sentiments, although the tightness and precision of the mandate has to be calibrated with the complexity and changeability of the world in mind.
CIDA's mandate currently consists of a multiple overlay of principles, policies and program priorities.
In past years, the emphasis has been on poverty alleviation, structural adjustment, the participation of women, environmentally sound development, food security and energy availability.
More recently, CIDA has shifted to an integrated focus on environmental, political, economic, social and cultural sustainability.
If mandate is understood to consist of a combination of fundamental principles and well defined priorities, then the Committee is convinced that clarifying CIDA's mandate is the first and single most important step towards strengthening the aid program.
As the OECD has pointed out, the legitimacy of Official Development Assistance (ODA) is dependent on the clarity of the goals, the integrity of the means and the capacity to demonstrate results.
To clarify CIDA's mandate, we begin by reaffirming the central principle of the development charter, namely support to the poorest people of the world.
There are attractive alternatives to this principle which would better reflect Canada's immediate self-interests but they lack an essential ingredient -- credibility.
As repeated public opinion polls have shown, the self-interested justifications for aid (e.g. trade promotion) have never cut much ice with Canadians.
Help for those most in need expresses the basic moral vision of aid and corresponds closely to what the vast majority of Canadians think development assistance is all about.
Accordingly, the Committee affirms that the primary purpose of Canadian Official Development Assistance is to reduce poverty by providing effective assistance to the poorest people, in those countries that most need and can use our help.
This statement of purpose introduces three elements that relate to targeting:
the focus on the poorest people;
the selection of countries based on need, which in our view should reflect broader measures than simply per capita GNP; 
and c) the proviso that countries must have a minimum absorptive capacity for Canadian assistance.
There are of course many ways of giving expression to a purpose as broad as poverty reduction.
The submission of the North-South Institute began with a reminder that "the concept of poverty has been recognized to be much more complex, requiring a broad array of strategies for its alleviation".
We should not imagine that there is a single or a simple strategy for helping the poor. And we need to keep in mind that most of the world's poorest people do not reside in countries classified as least-developed.
Nonetheless, over the past forty years of trial and error, lessons have been learned that help us to distinguish between what the President of CIDA has called "the spring catalogue and the fall catalogue of issues" (i.e. fads) and issues of enduring importance.
There is now an unprecedented degree of consensus on what makes good development policy.
Taking into account much of the testimony it has received, the Committee recommends that the Canadian aid program apply sustainable development as its basic policy framework, with a primary focus on the development of the human potential.
Such a focus derives from two of the main lessons of development: first, that it must concentrate on human endowments and well-being; and second, that it must be self-sustaining.
The program should be designed to help people help themselves and must be undertaken as a true partnership based on local consensus.
It is generally understood that sustainable development cannot be achieved without:
basic services such as health, education, nutrition and shelter; 
adequate levels of physical infrastructure;
equitable access to resources and a broad commitment to their sustainability;
a basic legal and institutional framework for human rights, democratic development and good government;
and access to sustainable employment and incomes.
With this in mind, the Committee has turned to the question of program priorities.
Given limited resources, we must guard against spreading ourselves too thinly.
CIDA's current policy framework captures the essence of sustainable development but without a clear focus on those areas of special emphasis that may be most appropriate for Canada to undertake.
The Committee believes that the highest priority should be assigned to the following six program areas, bearing in mind that effective development assistance must involve a focus on sound public policies, capable institutions and adequate service delivery: 
Basic Human Needs.
The Committee heard recommendations that the bulk of ODA should be directed to basic human needs.
The Committee agrees that greater emphasis should be paid to primary health care, basic education, nutrition, shelter, water and sanitation, with special attention paid to disabled and vulnerable groups.
At the same time, the Committee recognizes that there is no silver bullet like "education for women" or "water and sanitation".
Interventions at the micro level are important, but if commodity prices plunge, inflation spins out of control, public finances collapse or natural resources degrade, then much that has been done will be wasted.
Compared to the current total of less than 20%, the Committee recommends that support for basic human needs should account for a minimum of 25% of ODA.
Human Rights, Good Governance and Democratic Development.
The problem of poverty and unsustainable development is inextricably tied to the issue of empowerment.
Unless and until people have the opportunity to participate actively in the decision making of development, they will remain marginalized.
Particular attention should be paid to the building of democratic institutions that have the capability of responding to rapidly changing civil societies throughout the world.
The International Centre for Human Rights and Democratic Development has a strong role to play in this area in close co-ordination with CIDA, other government departments and NGOs.
The Participation of Women.
Improving the status of women and ensuring they are equal partners in society are fundamental aspects of sustainable development.
Supporting the participation of women includes targeted activities such as educating girls, providing reproductive health services, reforming legal systems and strengthening women's organizations.
As well, measures should be taken in all program areas to involve women as decision-makers, participants and beneficiaries of development.
There is clear evidence of the advantages that flow from improving the status of women, including increased family living standards, reduced fertility rates and stronger economic growth.
Environmental Sustainability.
There is an intimate connection between the environment, poverty and democracy.
The Committee wishes to single out the International Development Research Centre for its high quality work based on the agenda for sustainable development agreed at the Earth Summit in Rio.
We believe that particular attention should be paid by CIDA to the oceans, transboundary environmental problems and renewable resources such as forestry, fisheries and fresh water.
These are areas where Canadian capabilities are well suited to the needs of developing countries.
Private Sector Development.
Human endowments such as health and education will mean little if there are no jobs or income.
CIDA should help to strengthen the enabling environment for the development of the private sector in developing countries, and to support co-operatives,
micro- enterprise programs such as those supported by the Grameen Bank, and small and medium-sized enterprises that have the greatest potential for creating jobs.
Public Participation.
In the end, the sustainability of international development co-operation depends on something as intangible as human interest and understanding.
Public participation remains an essential element in mobilizing a Canadian capacity and commitment to international development.
To foster greater co-operation and understanding, CIDA should increase the resources it devotes to scholarships and exchange programs (including programs such as Canada World Youth).
In summary, the Committee recommends these six program priorities for Canada's Official Development Assistance:
basic human needs;
human rights, good governance and democratic development; 
the participation of women;
environmental sustainability;
private sector development;
and public participation.
This brings us to the last of the basic elements we believe are essential to the clarification of CIDA's mandate -- legislative enactment.
There are two sides to this question.
Against legislation is the risk that it would lessen adaptability and flexibility in CIDA, qualities that are essential in the fast changing world of the nineties.
As well, it is possible that many of the benefits of a legislated mandate -- greater transparency, for instance -- could be achieved effectively through other means, including an enhanced role for Parliament.
In favour of legislation is the fact that effective adaptation can only take place within a framework of common and sustainable purpose, precisely what has been lacking to date.
The Committee sees legislation as both holding CIDA to account and protecting Canadian ODA from random and wayward influences.
By legislative mandate, the Committee does not mean that every detail of Canadian ODA and CIDA operations should be spelled out: that would be a straitjacket.
Rather, the basic principles of the aid program should be expressed, and in language with which Canadians can identify.
In addition to basic principles, the legislative mandate should also spell out the program priorities. CIDA and Canadian ODA in general need the stability which comes from knowing that the basic challenges will last beyond the "fall or spring catalogue".
Accordingly, the Committee recommends that Parliament adopt legislation that spells out the basic principles to guide Canadian Official Development Assistance.
Finally, the Parliamentary mandate should be tended carefully by Parliament.
The Committee recommends that the House of Commons Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and International Trade or the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee hold regular reviews of Canadian ODA, including CIDA's performance, and that every effort be made to engage as many Canadians as possible in these reviews.
Global citizenship should not be confined to the few.
Step Two -- Distinguish Between Aid and Trade The Committee is persuaded that one of the strongest factors muddling the aid program is the blurring of the distinction between aid and trade promotion.
We note the observation found in the 1993 Report of the Auditor General which followed an in-depth review of CIDA bilateral programs in several South and Southeast Asian countries:
It is difficult for CIDA to concentrate on putting poverty first and encouraging self-reliance while, at the same time, it has commercial and political objectives that do not always lend themselves to dealing with poverty in a direct way and that encourage external dependency.
In making this point, the Auditor General was careful to acknowledge the government's right to set whatever objectives it wishes for the aid program, but warned that the number and variety of aid objectives can make it difficult for CIDA to plan and carry out its programs as effectively as it should.
A number of witnesses expressed concern about the CIDA Industrial Co-operation Program (CIDA INC).
The stated objective of this program is to promote private sector development in developing countries through business linkages with the Canadian private sector.
Witnesses were of the view, however, that this program had become little more than a trade promotion program for Canadian exports.
In light of this, the Committee is convinced that it is necessary once again to affirm that the purpose of the Canadian aid program is not to promote Canadian trade.
The Committee recommends that any functions of CIDA found to be essentially Canadian trade promotion activities be transferred to the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade or to the Export Development Corporation where they belong.
In drawing a distinction between aid and trade, the Committee would also stress that CIDA should strive for the complementarity of the two when it fits the program priorities outlined previously.
It is important to underline, in the first instance, the importance of policy changes in Canada to facilitate developing country exports.
Beyond that, it is clear that specific measures in developing countries to enhance trade can often exert a strong positive impact on development.
It is entirely appropriate for the CIDA private sector development program (which we have recommended as a program priority) to encourage trading relations with Canada.
This brings us to the related matter of aid tying (i.e. the requirement to source a portion of procurement in the donor country), which also attracted widespread attention from witnesses.
There are two sides to the question.
On the one hand, there is substantial evidence that the practice of tying "costs" the recipient countries some 10 to 15% of the value of the aid, that it encourages external dependency and wastes money on high-priced help from donor countries.
On the other hand, part of the purpose of the aid program is to build relations and understanding between peoples and countries, a result that is certainly encouraged by tying.
Moreover, if Canada were to untie completely while other donors did not, Canadian assistance would probably flow to companies and experts in other rich countries, a result Canadians would not accept, to put it mildly.
In these circumstances, compromise is called for.
The Committee is persuaded that there is additional room for untying, particularly for the benefit of the least developed countries.
Accordingly, Canada should work within the OECD for the gradual elimination of tying by all donor countries.
The Committee affirms that it is not part of the mandate of CIDA to promote Canadian exports, although there are particular circumstances where aid and trade objectives are complementary.
The Committee also recommends additional untying of Canadian aid, in concert with other donors.
Specifically, the government should work through the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD to lower the proportion of tied aid to 20% by the year 2000.
Step Four -- Target Assistance
At present, Canada's aid program is more dispersed than the OECD average.
Activities are being funded in some 128 countries, although 70% of country-to-country disbursements go to just 28 countries, involving some 65% of CIDA's field staff.
There were witnesses who questioned whether Canada should give small amounts of assistance to such a large number of countries. The Committee is inclined to agree.
Members feel that CIDA needs to identify its comparative advantages better and to strive for excellence in a smaller number of areas.
In making its choice of countries of concentration, CIDA should be guided first and foremost by its mandate of helping the poorest people.
According to CIDA data, in 1991-92, Canada directed almost 41% of total ODA to the least developed countries, about twice the average for the OECD.
On the other hand, the share of Canadian aid going to the middle-income developing countries has increased over the past decade.
The question of the geographic distribution of Canadian aid arises mainly in connection with Africa. Africa currently receives the largest share of bilateral ODA (45%).
People ask whether the situation is so hopeless that Canada should direct its assistance elsewhere, to where it would do more good.
It is true that the resurgence of ethnic and other conflicts in the 1990s has exacerbated an already difficult situation.
Yet it is possible to see another Africa -- an Africa of change and transition.
Efforts to resolve conflicts in Ethiopia, Mozambique and the Middle East have achieved some success.
The transition to a non-racial democracy in South Africa is of extraordinary significance to the whole of Southern Africa.
As more and more countries move from state-controlled to more market-based economies and open their political systems to greater participation, there is little doubt that a process of transition has commenced.
Asia, by contrast with Africa, is well on the way to becoming the global main street of the 21st century and there may be a case for reducing the share of Canadian assistance going to that part of the world.
Finally, the Americas stand out as having societies with enormous contrasts between rich and poor.
As such, they may offer the greatest potential for refocusing policy reform on poverty reduction.
In addition, Canada is taking on new responsibilities in the region as a result of hemispheric integration and the possibility of NAFTA extension.
The Committee believes that Canadian assistance continues to be too dispersed and recommends that a greater share of ODA should go to fewer countries, bearing in mind the primary purpose of the aid program.
In choosing its list of recipients, Canada should maintain the current high share of assistance to Africa, review the balance of ODA allocations for other regions, and work closely with other donors to strengthen the co-ordination and complementarity of international assistance as a whole.
New Aid Partners and Growing Demands This brings us to Central and Eastern Europe, and the former Soviet Union, where, as Chapter 2 warned, development is a first cousin of security.
Unless the transition to democracy is matched by a transition to prosperity, however slow and halting, there is a real threat of instability and resumed hostility towards the West.
Witnesses generally agreed on the need to broaden the array of foreign policy instruments deployed to promote peace and stability in that part of the world.
Development assistance was identified as an important element of an integrated strategy to support democratic reform, conflict prevention, the transition to a market economy and business linkages to Canada.
It was noted that several countries had already qualified for ODA and that more would become eligible in the coming years.
Co-operation with Canada has grown steadily.
Promising ventures have been built around democratic reforms, joint investment projects, technology transfers and a growing number of institutional linkages.
The Committee welcomes the initiative taken by the government to host a G-7 conference in Winnipeg on Partnership for Economic Transformation in Ukraine.
Witnesses were divided as to whether assistance should be concentrated in Russia or Ukraine, although a strong case was made for the latter based on its special ties to Canada.
The Committee recommends that Canada maintain active programs of assistance to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, and the former Soviet Union.
The Committee further recommends that funding for these programs not be at the expense of ODA priorities outlined above.
In addition, development agencies around the world are worried that a perverse retargeting of aid is taking place as the result of the proliferation of conflicts.
From 1988 to 1992, the share of total aid going to emergency relief tripled.
In the case of Canada, it currently stands at $90 million, or 3% of total ODA, and is on the rise.
To illustrate the escalation of humanitarian aid, the government pledged $1 million to aid Rwanda in April and in the months that followed upped the pledge to where it stood finally at $36 million.
It is worth noting that, of the disasters to which Canada responded in the past year, 25 were man made, that is to say conflicts of one kind or another, and only six were natural.
In view of the epidemic of internal conflicts around the world, witnesses recommended that the Canadian aid program must now address the root causes of conflict and fund conflict prevention and peace building programs of one kind or another.
The Committee agrees with the diagnosis but not fully with the prescription.
CIDA should indeed address the root causes of conflict.
But realistically, it is inconceivable that conflict can be totally eliminated.
When conflict arises, we see responsibility for its management and for peace building resting more properly with the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade and the Department of National Defence, working in close co-operation.
Faced with what would appear to be a steady escalation in the number of conflicts, the Committee recommends that Canada continue to be responsive to requests for emergency assistance but set eligibility criteria for emergency assistance to ensure that long-term development assistance remains the primary focus of the aid program.
Step Five -- Improve Results Throughout our hearings, witnesses said that the single most important step the Committee could take to increase the aid program's effectiveness would be to clarify CIDA's mandate, a matter that has come up time and again in the discussion to this point.
But there are a number of other requirements as well, beginning with the relationship with CIDA's partners.
The Partnership programs are responsive to the initiatives of Canadian organizations and account for some 13% of CIDA's budget.
It is estimated that some 500 NGOs, 2,000 businesses, and 125 colleges and universities (not to mention 30 municipalities, 10 federal and provincial government departments, 20 professional associations and others) are directly involved in delivering Canadian aid programs in the field.
The Committee is of the view that the rich diversity of partnerships is part of the strength of the aid program, but a point of diminishing returns may have been reached.
The Committee feels that CIDA may have spread its partnership program too thinly.
In this regard, there were few real assessments of performance offered to the Committee, which is odd considering what we know to be the overall mixed performance of international assistance.
CARE Canada was one of the few organizations to be sharply critical of its own kind -- NGOs.
In its brief, it suggested that the ability to deliver the goods "needs significant improvement".
It attributed part of the problem however to the byzantine complexity of CIDA funding: For all the diversity, there is little adaptability or innovation in the system.
It preserves a relationship which has clearly crossed the line separating valuable diversity and distinctiveness from the destructive effects of fragmentation and dispersion.
Along with performance, the Committee examined the question of shared funding.
At the present time, the ratio of matching grants is applied inconsistently, and CIDA often provides funding on a 9 to 1 basis or even higher.
The Committee recommends that the share of allocations to partnership programs be maintained, and even increased, where partners have a clearly demonstrated record of effectiveness and efficiency.
CIDA should also be guided by the strength and depth of the Canadian support base as measured by such things as the commitment of volunteers to the organization and the ability to generate matching contributions.
Support for multilateral organizations is a fundamental aspect of Canada's development assistance program, as it is of Canadian foreign policy.
The importance of multilateral organizations will likely grow over time as more and more decisions are taken through global systems of governance.
Multilateral organizations do things and reach places that are beyond the capability of a bilateral program, particularly at a time of diminishing resources.
The question of performance is however of direct concern.
Multilateral organizations receive about 25% of Canadian ODA and once again there is a rich profusion of acronyms and functions.
It is reported that 83% of multilateral aid goes to 6 organizations (the major UN organizations and the development banks) and the remaining 17% goes to 48 other organizations, a pattern of concentration and dispersion that is similar to Canadian bilateral aid.
The Committee was told repeatedly that multilateral agencies play a vital role and that Canada should affirm its tradition of strong support,
but there were very few details regarding performance.
We do know, however, that a review of the performance of the World Bank several years ago found that a substantial percentage of its projects were not performing satisfactorily.
The North-South Institute provided the Committee with the most in-depth testimony on the IFIs and was critical of some of their practices, calling for major reforms.
At the same time, the Institute argued that multilateral organizations would only grow in importance in the future and should be strongly supported by Canada.
We are conscious that CIDA has added layer upon layer of red tape to ensure that monies are spent properly, but we are not aware if this effort has translated into improved results.
We are convinced that the subject of aid effectiveness should be examined more thoroughly as part of an enhanced Parliamentary review process (recommended earlier under Step One).
The Canadian people would be far more impressed by the effort to renew and revitalize CIDA's mandate if they saw an equal concern to ensure that their money was being spent as effectively as possible.
All aid funding and delivery mechanisms will need to be kept under review in light of changing circumstances.
It is worth considering, for example, whether an all-grant program is still appropriate in countries with some capacity to repay 
-- we should examine options to achieve greater leverage with scarce aid resources.
Another area to examine is food aid.
The government should continue to monitor food aid programs to ensure that they are mainly used to respond to emergencies and to promote food security.
Great care should be taken to ensure that food aid does not create a dependency or act as a disincentive to local production.
Step Six -- Maintain Support Times have changed.
Whether we like it or not, Canada's desire to fight global poverty occurs side by side with a crisis of runaway national debt.
Many witnesses, and not only from the business community, told us that Canada's ability to contribute to a better world depends now on getting our own house in order.
Part of that will entail strict limits on spending for development assistance, as for other government programs.
On the other hand, other donors are worried that constantly falling Canadian ODA budgets have threatened to deprive CIDA of the critical mass of resources needed to deliver an integrated and effective program.
In these circumstances, the Committee puts great emphasis on clarifying the mandate and priorities of the aid program: it is essential that CIDA bear down and concentrate its limited resources in the most effective ways possible.
The Committee believes that it is also time to be open and honest about the prospects of Canada achieving its international aid objectives.
The pledge to achieve the target of 0.7% is not going to be reached in the current fiscal situation.
Canada's ODA/GNP ratio is about 0.4% at present (seventh among OECD donors) and fast sinking to the OECD average of 0.34%.
At the same time, it is important that CIDA be given some stability in its funding so that it can plan for the future and for the changes in its mandate which we have recommended.
The Committee recommends that the government commit itself to stabilizing ODA at the present GNP ratio and seek to make progress towards the 0.7% target when Canada's fiscal situation permits.
Recognizing that expanded trade opportunities are more important than aid to many developing countries, the Committee also recommends that the government seek opportunities to open Canadian markets further to developing countries, particularly the least developed.
In Conclusion -- The Need for Communication and Dialogue
The Committee believes that these six practical steps can help significantly to restore the vitality and sense of purpose of the Canadian Inter- national Development Agency, and thus of the Canadian aid program.
But a final element is called for.
We were struck by the wide divergence of views on some development issues and the corresponding need for greater understanding and dialogue on the aid program.
The starting point for progress in this area should be a greater commitment to transparency, including more complete reporting to Parliament.
A further measure, one that could bridge the divide between the various constituencies involved in development assistance, would be to organize periodic consultations involving representatives from the private sector, NGOs, academic institutions and other major groups.
The consultations would consider issues related not only to international assistance but to the wider agendas of security and sustainable development.
In this way, a link could also be made with broader consultative mechanisms on foreign policy.
Accordingly, the Committee recommends the establishment of broader based consultations on development co-operation, including the participation of Parliamentarians.
We end this chapter with a note on realism.
Total world-wide development assistance is a tiny fraction of the trade and financial flows that wash around the world.
It is a small fraction of the resources that developing countries commit to their own development.
Let us be clear, development assistance is not going to raise the boats of two thirds of humanity on a great tide of money from the rich world.
Its role, to cite Richard Jolly of UNICEF, is as a catalyst and source of countervailing power, and as a bridge between countries and peoples.
It is time for the international community to use its limited resources with more sense of purpose and priority than it has ever done in the past.
END
CHAPTER 6: PROJECTING CANADIAN CULTURE AND LEARNING ABROAD
What do the songs of Bryan Adams, Celine Dion, the Rankin Family, Roch Voisine, and k.d.lang;
the novels of Margaret Atwood, Robertson Davies, Anne Hébert, and Antonine Maillet; 
the productions of le Cirque du Soleil, Robert Lepage, and Carbone 14;
the films of Atom Egoyan and Denys Arcand;
and the Nobel prize-winning discoveries of John Polanyi and Bertram Brockhouse have in common?
Simply put: they have captured the attention of people around the world.
And in so doing they help forge an identifiable image for Canada, a sense of what we stand for, of what kind of society we are and, yes, of what we produce.
Never before has a Parliamentary Committee reviewing Canadian foreign policy received such a simple message from so many witnesses:
Canadian foreign policy should celebrate and promote Canadian culture and learning as an important way of advancing our interests in international affairs.
We were told that perhaps even more than Canada's contributions to United Nations peacekeeping and to development assistance, the achievements of these Canadians are the face of Canada abroad.
"To the extent that foreign policy is dependent on foreign public recognition, that policy is dependent on our projection of our culture.
What's more we are more dependent on that cultural projection than the handful of larger countries who are our allies and our competitors and who have other ways of projecting their image."
In our opinion, these words of John Ralston Saul state a fundamental truth and one which, in the past, has not been accorded the recognition it deserves.
For University of Toronto political scientist Franklyn Griffiths, culture has another aspect: 
"culture and security are not normally connected, but ... it is high time to think about these connections because the world is changing.
The new calculus of foreign policy must be one in which cultural considerations loom far larger than we have thought in recent decades" (10:12).
He notes that the flip-side of promoting our civilization abroad is the nurturing of a vibrant cultural and educational life in Canada because these are crucial for maintaining a capacity for choice:
If Canadians are not participating in a framework that allows them to experience their diversity and their sameness, to see their lands, rivers, forests and cities on film screens, to listen to one another's music and watch one another's dance, if these things are not well supported,...the very foundations for autonomy of choice are going to suffer.
Indeed, I believe they do suffer in this country.
We believe that Mr. Griffiths has stated another fundamental truth.
As noted by the Association des producteurs de films et de télévision du Québec:
Cultural goods are not like other merchandise.
They speak a language, they have a nationality, specific socio-cultural roots, a style and a colouring that define their conception, their acceptance as well as their international circulation.
Culture, Science, Education and Foreign Policy 
The projection of Canadian culture and learning abroad should therefore be regarded as a fundamental dimension of Canadian foreign policy.
The promotion of Canadian values and interests depends on the image Canada projects abroad.
The stronger the image, the greater Canada's capacity for effective and independent action in foreign affairs.
Yet Canadians have still to recognize this truth and to apply it.
A recent consultant study by H.H. Chartrand (The Business of International Cultural Affairs), using a broad definition of international cultural activities which includes the arts, science and higher education, tells us that in 1990 the federal government spent $80.9 million on these activities.
That same year, France spent $1,492 million, or slightly more than 18 times what Canada spent,
Germany $1,146 million, Japan $1,551 million and the United Kingdom $765 million.
Per capita, France spent $26.60, Germany $18.50, the U. K. $13.40, Japan $12.60 and Canada only $3.10.
was not an exceptional year: the above numbers therefore give us an accurate picture of the weight placed by five governments on the advancement abroad of their culture, broadly defined.
These numbers raise an important question.
Why do the countries listed above, with the exception of Canada, spend as much on international cultural activities as they do?
In the paper prepared for the Committee, Saul suggested an answer:
There are three central reasons for the importance that other developed nations place on culture and education:
*1. Countries are in large part the image they project abroad.
Their maneuverability and influence in the world community is affected by that image.
Cultural exports can be extremely profitable.
They constitute, for example, the United States' second most important export.
Trade penetration abroad depends to a great extent on that image.
To put it crassly, American films sell America.
They sell soft drinks, clothes, cars, tourism.
They sell the myth.
Nations which do not make every effort to export their cultures are naive and self-destructive.
They are attempting to function without a public image in an international climate where those images play an important role.
As Saul notes, ``the question is not whether we can afford to spend to export culture. The question is whether we can afford not to''.
Witnesses from across the country repeatedly stressed the importance of culture and higher education for the conduct of foreign affairs.
For Paul Leduc, Vice-President -- Education and Research at the Université du Québec, "foreign policy should integrate cultural and scientific relations in the same way as economic and political relationships."
For Douglas Wright, former President of the University of Waterloo, foreign policy should give 
``great weight to the role of human resources, intellectual capital, culture, all manifestations of human achievement, as essential factors in the expression of Canada's interests abroad and domestically" (10:25).
Thomas Wood, President of Mount Royal College in Calgary, suggested that "foreign policy in our time is inextricably linked with educational and cultural enterprise" (10:17).
In the new economy, "higher education and culture should play central, not peripheral, roles in Canada's foreign affairs" (10:18).
For the Regroupement des professionnels de la danse du Québec:
The reason why we believe the Government of Canada should include arts and culture as a key element in its foreign policy, is because we are convinced that, by doing so, it will act in the best interests of Canada.
That way, not only would it have a policy that would encourage peaceful coexistence between the people of various countries and a better understanding of different cultures, 
but it would also contribute to the development and the stabilization of a very dynamic sector which is recognized as such at the international level.
There is yet another reason why we believe culture and learning are relevant to foreign policy: the linkages with prosperity.
Strengthening Canadian identity and enhancing our innovative and creative capacity make us better armed to deal with a more intensely competitive global system.
It has become commonplace to say that the new economic environment which we have already entered, more than any other before it, is based on knowledge of all sorts, especially scientific and technical knowledge.
As recent theories of economic growth have emphasized, it is above all new knowledge that is crucial because that is the source of innovation of all sorts -- technological, organizational, managerial and other.
That in turn can enhance the productivity of labour and of capital which holds out the promise of achieving higher living standards not only for Canadians but for people world-wide.
When thinking of the transmission of old knowledge and the generation of new we should avoid creating too much of a contrast between the exploitation and sale of natural resources, on which Canada has traditionally relied, and the operation of computerized financial data flow systems.
Knowledge can be applied in new and productive ways not only to the extraction of natural resources but also to their global distribution.
Impossible then to exaggerate the importance and centrality of knowledge, especially of new knowledge, as ingredients in the economic prosperity and well-being of Canadians.
It is all the more true, given the crucial place of foreign trade in our economic well-being.
Not all knowledge is transmitted and accumulated in schools, colleges, and universities.
Governments, business corporations, foundations and other research centres also play a significant role.
However institutions of learning have a primary role to play in the creation of a larger stock of human capital.
As noted by David Strange, President of the University of British Columbia:
We are looking at an analysis that suggests that we add well over $2 billion a year into the gross domestic product of this province, which is a significant fraction of that activity.
How does that come about?
A lot of it comes about because of the research and development activities that we all carry out, which in many ways in today's world is one of the principal job-creation activities.
I've been giving a speech that I call "R&D/Job Creation''.
Institutions of higher education in Canada also have an important international role to play.
Canada has many very good universities and colleges which are already home to thousands of foreign students.
Canadian professors, researchers and students are instrumental in creating an atmosphere in which foreign students learn about Canada, its people and its culture.
These students are potential ambassadors of Canada when they return home.
Consequently Canadian universities and colleges, all supported in varying degrees with public funds, have a responsibility to ensure that the image that foreign students gain of Canada is a positive one.
It is also desirable that as a country we be as hospitable as possible to foreign students.
Discriminatory measures, such as depriving them of medical coverage, is short-sighted and ultimately against Canada's best interests.
We should be encouraging more foreign students to come to study in Canadian universities and colleges.
The pay-off is not only in terms of goodwill.
Each student purchases an estimated $15,000 a year of goods and services here and an increasing number are graduate students with families.
The invisible export flow is strongly in Canada's favour, with more than 60,000 foreign students in colleges, institutes or universities here, as against 20,000 Canadians taking formal education outside Canada.
There is in fact increasing recognition of the international dimension to the creation and diffusion of knowledge.
As Robert Prichard, President of the University of Toronto, noted before the Committee, Canada's largest university has "106 international agreements, covering more than 50 different countries around the globe.
Our faculty, who number almost 6,000 in total, work in virtually every corner of the globe in their research and scholarship.
We draw students from virtually every country in the world (. . .)
This year there are over 5,000 international students (. . .) over 25,000 of (our) graduates live in countries other than Canada.
In many cases they occupy prominent positions in the academic, political, economic and cultural lives of their countries."
Jim Fox, President of the Canadian Bureau for International Education, reinforced the economic dimension of this message by noting that: 
Education is trade.
For Canada, educational trade amounts to $1.5 billion.
This relates to international students in this country alone.
In terms of selling Canadian expertise and education and training abroad, we are earning more than $1 billion in foreign exchange per year for this country.
That adds up to $2.5 billion.
Education, in fact, ranks as an export that is next to wheat in its importance to this country.
Yet, this is not being recognized and we are not beginning to realize our market potential.
In its brief to the Committee, the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada noted that, among its member institutions in 1993, 72% referred to an international role in their mission statements, up from 63% in 1991.
Canada's universities and colleges develop the human potential, provide a forum for Canadian knowledge, ideas and values, and create international partnerships and alliances.
In addition, they build Canadian competitiveness.
In large measure these "outputs" depend both on bringing foreign students and academics to Canada and on sending Canadian students and academics abroad.
Cutting edge scientific research is rarely confined to the borders of a single country.
Increasingly, success depends on international scientific networks and alliances. In this regard, we heard that Canada was not as active as it should be in participating in such networks and alliances.
Speaking of the trilateral discussions on higher education and research among the NAFTA countries, Douglas Wright told the Committee that: 
the Mexican government has supported initiatives based in Mexico very generously.
The US. government has similarly been generous in its support.
Canada has not yet been able to match the efforts of the US. and Mexican governments, and it's a matter of some embarrassment to those of us involved in this work to say that.
The Committee was impressed by the strong consensus amongst the higher education community on the need for the foreign policy of Canada to address the strategic importance of the internationalization of higher education in Canada.
They argued convincingly that Canada's capacity to compete in the global economy will depend in part on the next generation of the best and brightest developing the knowledge and skills necessary to deal with other cultures and to participate in foreign environments.
To do so Canada should support international student mobility programs designed to give foreign experience to young scholars.
In addition, the mobility of faculty should be supported for two reasons.
They can effectively internationalize the higher education curriculum in Canada so that those students not participating in international mobility schemes can nonetheless develop a better knowledge of the international environment.
They can also promote international research linkages vital to the maintenance of the quality of Canada's own research base.
Support for such international research linkages should also be provided as they will assist in the realization of both the political and the economic objectives of Canadian foreign policy.
A coherent strategy on these three fronts
(student mobility, faculty mobility and international research linkages) would help in the achievement of key national objectives, including increased domestic mobility and the improvement of standards of higher education in Canada.
There is thus a linkage between strengthening this aspect of international cultural affairs and the new economic goal of human resource development.
For all these reasons, the Committee strongly recommends that international cultural, scientific, and educational affairs should be treated as a fundamental dimension of Canadian foreign policy.
The Committee further recommends that Canada's international cultural, scientific, and educational foreign policy seek to: 
affirm Canada's cultural sovereignty;
assist Canada in becoming a major participant in the global knowledge- based economy;
contribute to the vitality of the arts and higher education;
promote the export of Canadian cultural and educational products;
and facilitate the transfer of knowledge.
Taking into account that foreign policy is an area of federal jurisdiction, that culture and science are areas of shared jurisdiction with the provinces, and that education is an area of provincial jurisdiction,
the Committee encourages the government to seek the collaboration of interested provinces in the implementation of Canada's international cultural, scientific and educational foreign policy, through the effective use of mechanisms such as the Federal-Provincial Consultative Committee on Education-Related International Activities.
Canadian students, in fairly large numbers, go to study abroad.
Understandably, by far the largest proportion of these go to the United States, followed well behind by Britain and France.
Very few find their way to other European universities, and even fewer to the schools of Latin America and Asia.
The Committee is aware of the very high quality and, therefore, of the great attractiveness of American, British, and French universities, but it believes that institutions of higher education elsewhere have much to offer.
It would therefore be desirable to create financial and other types of opportunities that would allow Canadian students to spend shorter periods -- six months or one year, though possibly more -- in centres of higher learning in countries beyond the United States and traditional European destinations such as Britain and France.
The Committee recommends that the Government of Canada give careful consideration to the creation of scholarship and exchange programs that would involve the private sector in an essential way, to allow Canadian students to spend short, though meaningful, periods in centres of higher learning beyond the United States and traditional European destinations, and to allow students from those countries to do the same in Canada.
It would be useful if such programs included provisions for keeping track of their alumni.
The Committee wishes to encourage the Canadian universities which are home to a sizeable number of foreign students to adopt the practice, widespread in other countries, of keeping track of foreign students when they return to their home country, 
by corresponding with them regularly,
by encouraging the formation of alumni groups in foreign countries
and by inventing new means of staying in touch.
Canadian Embassies should be involved in such a co-operative effort.
The Challenges at Home
John Ralston Saul suggests that "culture passes through four stages:
creation, production (such as publishing and film production), distribution [and] consumption".
It is at the creation stage that culture in Canada is at its most vibrant and healthy, reflecting a major impetus from the grassroots.
The creativity of Canadian artists, scientists and scholars is well-known, and has seen a remarkable expansion in recent decades.
This expansion has been enriched by the revival of Canada's aboriginal cultures and with the contributions of cultures from around the world.
Across Canada, the spontaneous upswelling of community-based cultural activities has been particularly remarkable.
It is at the production stage that problems begin in Canada.
A country cannot project its arts, culture and knowledge if it does not produce and subsequently distribute them.
We may expect, in the normal course, some autonomous market production and distribution of cultural and educational services,
but historical experience and Adam Smith are there as witnesses to the fact that the market does not do these things in the volumes or the variety that are desirable.
In particular, the market often shies away from truly creative ventures because these do not necessarily promise sure-fire returns.
It would therefore be desirable for governments to support domestic production and distribution.
Some difficult international problems related to the production and distribution of cultural output will also have to be resolved if Canadian culture is to thrive.
For some time, globalization has been having a profound effect on cultures around the world.
Of course artists -- composers, painters and writers, for example -- have always worked in a global environment and evaluated their work by reference to global standards; 
the first persons to recognize and to begin the analysis of the phenomenon of globalization were students of culture, Marshall McLuhan of the ``global village'' among the most important and best known.
As we have earlier noted, globalization meshes very nicely with the agenda of transnational corporations (TNCs).
That is also true for the world of culture.
Over the recent past, we have witnessed the emergence of large vertically and horizontally integrated TNCs that control production and distribution networks.
These integrated TNCs promote certain forms of culture and shun others.
What has to be truly worrying is the fact that with the growth of cultural TNCs and the corresponding reduction in their numbers, we are witnessing an enormous concentration of power in the hands of fewer and fewer individuals who will use that power to decide what consumers of cultural products will be allowed to see and hear.
As in other domains of activity, the globalization of culture is a fact.
However, if we feel strongly enough about our creative arts, scholarship and culture, we will have to encourage, support and protect them against some of the worst effects of globalization.
A truly living culture is, indeed, the only feasible means to resist the leveling effect of cultural globalization and, as a consequence, the best way of strengthening a sense of community.
Given the impediments facing Canada's cultural sectors, it is remarkable that the country's cultural industries employed nearly 600,000 persons and sold almost $15 billion worth of goods and services in 1992.
It is no less remarkable that a not insignificant fraction of that cultural output was sold abroad.
Indeed in the case of some cultural industries, Canada, traditionally a net importer, has become a net exporter.
SOCAN, for example, now collects as much in royalties for the use of Canadian music in foreign countries as it does domestically -- what was once a 90/10 division has become a 50/50 split.
These numbers and trends notwithstanding, it is still a fact that many Canadians consume mostly foreign cultural products, and this, not only because they like these products but because their own culture is often hard to obtain.
That in turn depends on a variety of factors, of which the lack of adequate distribution systems and networks is among the most glaring.
The poverty of domestic distribution facilities impedes the exploitation of economies of scale in production and distribution which would, were they available, permit more production and a much broader diffusion of Canadian cultural products, first at home and then abroad.
It is primarily because of this factor, for example, that only 4% of screens in the country show Canadian films on the average at any one time, and that only 17% of books and publications sold in Canada are Canadian.
A first part of the explanation for the limited availability and, hence, for the restricted on-going production of Canadian cultural products is that the output of cultural industries elsewhere is often, in the words of some witnesses, `dumped' in the Canadian market.
A film, for example, whose cost of production has been recovered in the home market, can be sold abroad for virtually any price and continue to make money.
Countries with small internal markets are almost always at a disadvantage vis-à-vis countries with large internal markets which can recoup the costs of virtually anything they produce in their home market.
The ability to capitalize on a very large and very rich internal market and, therefore, to recover production costs (and generally much more) in the home market allows American cultural industries to sell their output anywhere in the world at prices that can be as low as desired to penetrate these foreign markets.
The phenomenon that is often called 'Americanization' is to no small extent the result of this sort of `dumping' by American cultural industries.
That is why `national content' rules, which can take a variety of forms, are essential if indigenous cultures are to have a chance to emerge and to grow and, as importantly, if indigenous cultural products are to be consumed by the local residents.
There are a number of areas in the domain of culture where Canadian content rules are already applied.
The Committee believes, however, that more could be done in this area.
It is to be expected that national content rules, especially as they apply to the showing and therefore to the consumption of films and TV programs will be fiercely opposed by the exporting industries; after all, it is of pure profits that they are being deprived.
The rules, however, are needed.
The CRTC has the power to regulate the level of Canadian content in broadcasting and it does so, but so weakly that it gives the impression that it prefers to let private Canadian broadcasters enjoy the benefits that result from distributing foreign, largely American, cultural products that they buy at artificially low prices.
In a similar vein, Canada is the most cabled country in the world, but the CRTC again imposes only weak content requirements on cable networks. As a consequence, on the English language cable networks 96% of drama and entertainment is foreign.
Another part of the explanation for the limited availability of Canadian cultural products in Canada and abroad is that governmental involvement in culture and cultural ventures is too limited.
It is, for example, easy to imagine the creation of a commercial distribution company -- jointly owned by Canadian publishers and the government -- which, by acting for a number of publishers, could be large enough to distribute Canadian publications at home and abroad on a wide basis.
The feebleness of governmental resolve is also apparent in the ease with which inexpensive but potentially very powerful cultural programs, such as Radio Canada International and the translation programs of the Canada Council (which support the translation of novels by Canadian authors into the other official language) have been curtailed.
Both programs make Canada more visible to ever larger audiences.
A final part of the explanation for the lack of adequate access to Canadian cultural products can be found in the fact that we do not sufficiently exploit existing trade development tools -- including such simple things as the participation of artists in ministerial-level trade missions -- to push our cultural products.
The Committee heard Ann Medina argue that: [Marketing and distribution] mean ``pushing our cultural industries abroad in the same way that it pushes through telecommunications, subways, etc., with export development money'' (10:23).
And Jim Fox of the Canadian Bureau for International Education (CBIE) concurred: "In terms of trade and trade promotion, we should look at what other countries are doing in marketing education ...
Indeed, we have no access, as educators, to the export development programs of the federal government, such as the PEMD (Program for Export Market Development).
We are losing trade opportunities" (29:31).
As for the final stage, which pertains to the consumption of Canadian arts and Canadian higher education by Canadians, we face an inescapable fact.
We are relatively few Canadians living next to relatively many Americans, and a majority of Canadians reads and understands the language of American culture.
It is hardly surprising then that many of us consume more American than Canadian artistic, scientific and academic products.
The penetration of American cultural products is particularly advanced among English-speaking Canadians since language is not a natural barrier.
We do not think Canadians want to escape American culture but we do think they would like to temper some of the consequences of the present situation, which are not only detrimental to Canadian culture but which undermine the conduct of Canada's foreign affairs.
All the evidence suggests that the promotion of a country's interests and values in the world depends in large part on the image which, through the export of cultural and educational products, it projects abroad and, of equal importance, on the strength of culture and education at home.
To put it differently, the effectiveness of Canada's foreign policy will be greater, the more remarkable the creativity of its artists and scholars, the more efficiently their works are produced, the more widely they are distributed and the greater their consumption both at home and abroad.
Strengthening the domestic framework for Canadian culture would further this objective.
In the preceding paragraphs, we have outlined some of the considerations and elements of an international cultural, scientific, and educational relations strategy.
Others have been drawn to the attention of the Committee by John Ralston Saul in his position paper and by the Hon. Serge Loyal in his report entitled La Politique culturelle internationale des années 90 : les enjeux et les moyens d'une relance.
These include proposals addressing the specific circumstances of each of the major cultural industries: publishing, music, arts, sports, television, motion pictures, and theatre.
As regards publishing, the Committee notes proposals regarding the translation grants programs, the creation of a distribution agency, the publication of a Book Newsletter, the establishment of a literacy agency, and suggestions for educational publishing.
As regards music, the Committee notes suggestions concerning CDs and tapes as well as tours by Canadian artists.
In the domain of visual arts, the Committee draws the government's attention to proposals on museums and galleries as well as the holding of thematic conferences.
In sports, the Committee believes consideration should be given to the holding of Arctic Games and North American Indigenous Games.
Earlier, we alluded to actions that the CRTC could take.
Other measures relevant to television include the creation of a sales agency and the promotion of international sales.
As regards motion pictures, the Committee's attention was drawn to specific proposals on funding, film policy, airline films and the promotion of co-production agreements.
Finally, concrete suggestions regarding festivals, exchanges, and the creation of a national school have been made to promote Canadian theatre.
These proposals should be evaluated as part of a strategy to implement Canada's international cultural, scientific, and educational foreign policy.
The Committee recommends that the Government of Canada with the collaboration of interested provinces, give high priority to developing a strategy for Canada's international cultural, scientific, and educational relations.
Such a strategy should consider regulations and other means, including joint ventures with the private sector, of producing and distributing Canadian cultural output at home and abroad.
The strategy should address the specific circumstances and proposals, as outlined in John Ralston Saul's paper and the Hon. Serge Joyal's report, regarding the major cultural industries such as publishing, music, art, sports, television, motion pictures, and theatre.
The strategy, once completed, should be referred to the Foreign Affairs Standing Committees of Parliament.
As suggested in the Chapter on trade, the Government of Canada should use the cultural industries exemption provided under the NAFTA and the FTA to introduce regulatory and any other measures to protect and promote Canadian cultural industries.
The government should seek alliances with like-minded countries in future international negotiations to recognize the need to protect and promote national cultures.
The Committee also recommends that the Government of Canada dedicate itself to the promotion of a vibrant Canadian culture by increasing its support for creative artists and creative scholars and to the development of the means necessary for the distribution at home and abroad of what these artists and scholars create.
In addition, the Committee recommends that the Government of Canada seek the co-operation of interested provincial governments to increase support for the "internationalization" of education,
that is, support for academic and student mobility, institutional exchanges, and the development of international research and development networks.
CHAPTER 7: WHERE CANADA FITS IN
Historically, Canada's international involvement has always been a combination of bilateral ties and multilateral engagements.
However, before World War II that involvement was limited.
The bilateral ties were mainly with Britain and the United States in the "North Atlantic triangle", but with nascent relations with France and Japan, while membership in the British Commonwealth of Nations gave Canada an additional window on the world.
Canada was also a member of the League of Nations but followed a rather isolationist policy.
World War II changed all that.
Stronger and more self-confident, Canada took an active part in shaping the post-war international order and, when the Cold War paralyzed the United Nations, in organizing the collective defence of the West.
At that time, there were four pillars of Canada's foreign policy: ties with Britain and the expanding Commonwealth;
increasingly close and substantial relations with the United States; membership in the United Nations; and participation in NATO.
Subsequently, Canada's involvement underwent significant change:
the bilateral ties with Britain weakened, even as the relationship with the United States intensified; 
other bilateral relations grew, particularly with France and other members of the European Economic Community (EEC), with Japan and China;
Canada cultivated relations with the Soviet Union and its allies in the interests of détente;
Canada used its Commonwealth connection and its new membership in la Francophonie to reach out to the developing world.
At the same time Canada was a significant player in most, if not all, the multilateral organizations that had sprung up, both inside and outside the UN system, to deal with the need for enhanced international co-operation.
Today Canada faces a new set of challenges that call for a new foreign policy agenda and new diplomatic methods.
Bilaterally, the greatest challenge is the management of the overwhelmingly important relationship with the United States.
Multilaterally, the challenge is to build a rules-based international system and to develop a co-operative approach to the emerging new global problems.
At the same time the neat division into bilateral and multilateral approaches has been giving way to a new phenomenon: the growing importance of regionalism and its accompanying trend toward continental integration.
It has important implications for Canadian foreign policy, and Canada needs to come to grips with it urgently.
Relations with the United States
Canada's relations with the United States are coloured first of all by the fact that Canada's sole neighbour in North America is the world's only remaining superpower.
As former Canadian ambassador Richard Gorham told the Committee, "We can talk about choices but living next to the United States is not one of them."
And President Kennedy's comment, when he addressed the Canadian Parliament years ago, is still apt:
"Geography has made us neighbours, history has made us friends, economics has made us partners, and necessity has made us allies."
It is a close, complex and at times difficult relationship.
The two countries share a broad community of customs and ideals, and a vast tissue of interwoven ties and interests.
Despite the similarities, therefore also many strong differences, be they in terms of the respective historical experiences, the political philosophies, the federal systems, the ethnic and linguistic characters, or the attitudes toward law, order and government.
This is a relationship that touches not only all Canada's foreign policy interests but also most aspects of its national life.
Canada is largely dependent on the United States for trade and investment, and Canada's resulting vulnerability is aggravated by the fact that its merchandise trade surplus with the United States helps to finance its large foreign debt.
In the defence field Canada is probably more dependent on the United States than any other ally.
In the field of culture and communications most Canadians are constantly and massively exposed to American radio and television programs, movies and magazines, tastes and fashions.
This is also a multidimensional relationship, involving a wide variety of non-governmental actors as well as governments on both sides at every level (federal, province/state, and municipal).
Provincial premiers meet regularly with state governors in various regions, and mayors meet their opposite numbers.
There are many agreements between provinces and adjacent states.
There is an enormous range of business, labour and professional links.
And there is a growing number of cross-border trade and economic co-operation arrangements involving both sub-national governments and the private sector.
Most of these relationships exist independently of the federal government, but it can in many instances influence the framework.
The personal, professional and private sector ties grease the wheels of the bilateral relationship, often resolving problems on their own.
At the same time, they add to the complexity of the relationship, and may make problem solving more difficult at times.
The sheer size and complexity of the relationship mean that there are bound to be disputes and irritants from time to time.
What is important is not that the relations be "good" in some abstract sense but that they be well managed.
If good relations were to become an end in itself for Canada, then as the weaker partner Canada would always be under pressure to make concessions to serve that end.
On the other hand, if good management is the aim, than there is a better chance of arranging the sort of mutual accommodation required to meet the needs of both partners.
Good management calls for mutual understanding.
There is a need, from the Canadian point of view at least, to help Americans understand Canada better and the differences that distinguish Canada from the United States.
There is a reciprocal need for Canadians to try harder to understand the political, economic and strategic realities of the United States, and the global responsibilities that it bears.
Good management also calls for effective two-way communication.
Over the years there has in fact been a steady expansion of institutionalized consultations between the two countries.
The International Joint Commission and the Permanent Joint Board on Defence are of long standing.
The Canada-US. Inter-Parliamentary Group is more recent, having been established in 1959.
Still more recent is the practice of regular meetings between the two Secretaries of State, which were begun in 1982, between the Prime Minister and the President, begun in 1984, and between other cabinet ministers.
The personal relationships which are established in this way, particularly at the highest level, can be crucially important when dealing with the US. Government, where all senior appointments are made by the President.
Unfortunately the regular meetings between the two foreign ministers have lapsed; they should be resumed.
At the same time account must be taken of the complications that flow from the creative tension that exists between the executive and the legislature under the US. Constitution.
This was not as significant a factor in Canada-US. relations during World War II and after for two reasons:
because circumstances then enhanced the powers of the President as Commander-in-Chief;
and because Congress was content to concentrate on domestic affairs and leave foreign affairs to the President.
In the last couple of decades, however, the situation has changed radically because of a number of developments to which witnesses drew our attention.
They referred to a loss of congressional confidence in the President as a result of the Nixon Administration.
They mentioned a progressive blurring of the distinction between foreign and domestic policies.
To this has been added the increasing reluctance of Congress to delegate to the President the power it has under the Constitution to regulate trade, because of the perception that the executive is too ready to bargain away American trade interests to gain advantages elsewhere.
Finally, there has been the increasing fragmentation of power in Congress as the old seniority rules have been abolished.
Having Democratic majorities in both Houses is no longer a guarantee that the President can get legislation through Congress.
As former ambassador to Washington Allan Gotlieb told the Committee, "We have had the deepest. . .changes in the way the US. system is operating. . .
We have a decentralized power situation in the Congress where the committee chairmen and sub-committee chairmen are the true exercisers of executive power. . ."
The conclusion is clear.
In dealing with the United States, Canada, like other countries, can no longer rely on the executive branch to make its case; it must deal directly with Congress.
This lesson has in fact been applied by the Canadian Embassy in Washington for the last decade.
The Committee was told that embassy staff enjoy unrivalled access to the offices of the members of the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Meeting Congressmen when Canadian interests are threatened has become a principal activity of the ambassador.
Building coalitions of American companies or industries threatened by protectionist measures promoted by other American interests (e.g. the American pasta industry, which faced increased costs if the free entry of Canadian durum wheat was curtailed) has become an effective way of influencing Congressmen.
Other ways of relating to Congress must be found.
Many of us who have had contact with Congressmen and Senators have been struck by the easy communication and ready access that prevails among legislators.
These represent assets with a potential for conveying Canadian concerns to Congress that have been largely ignored.
In particular, we believe that the Canada-US. Inter-Parliamentary Group, established in 1959 by agreement between the two legislatures, could be organized much more effectively than it has been.
The Group holds regular meetings between 24 members of each legislature at least once a year, or more often if problems arise.
To realize its potential, however, Parliament must revise its selection procedures to ensure that Canadian delegations comprise Members of Parliament with credibility, chosen for their knowledge of specific items on the agenda.
To secure agreement on the strongest delegations possible will require the active collaboration of the political parties in both Houses.
Members of Parliament could also be involved in reaching out to Congress in other ways.
The Standing Committees of Foreign Affairs of the two Houses could enter into direct contact with their opposite numbers.
The Canadian Steel Caucus has also proved to be an effective instrument for countering the arguments made to Congressmen by the US. steel lobby.
We recognize that some increased funds would be needed to support these activities, but the benefits, in terms of making Canada's case and developing ongoing relations with Congress, would be substantial.
The freedom of action of every nation is more or less restricted in today's interdependent world, but Canada's is more restricted than most because of its geographic proximity to the United States and the asymmetrical nature of the relationship.
There is an enormous disparity of power between the two countries.
There is also an enormous disparity of information and knowledge about each other.
Consequently the impact of the United States on Canada is out of all proportion to the impact of Canada on the United States.
All the more reason for Canada to redouble its efforts to maximize its bargaining power and advance its interests.
There need no longer be Cold War constraints on Canadian foreign policy options, witnesses told us, but according to Allan Gotlieb, the new constraint may be a lack of will to put our money where our mouth is.
The basic problem of Canada's relations with the United States was first defined in the 1970 foreign policy review as "living distinct from but in harmony" with the United States.
Experience since then has shown how difficult it is to serve both objectives -- living in harmony with as well as distinct from the United States -- and to keep them in balance.
The "third option" -- a concept developed a couple of years later -- was designed to do that;
it was "to develop and strengthen the economic and other aspects of Canada's national life and in the process to make it less vulnerable to external factors and more capable of maintaining its economic, social and cultural development".
Two other options -- the "first", to maintain the status quo, and the "second", to pursue closer integration with the United States -- were rejected.
In practice, however, it was the status quo that was maintained, and when the status quo was judged to be unsatisfactory, the decision was taken in the mid-80s to negotiate the Free Trade Agreement (FTA).
Canada has now to come to grips with the growing economic integration that the FTA has encouraged.
While it has brought larger scale production, freer movement of some factors of production, and enhanced access to the US. market, as we have pointed out in Chapter 3, it has not spared Canada from the repeated application of US. protectionist measures.
It has also done nothing to reduce the vulnerability of an economy that has so many eggs in the American basket, that suffers from a comparative dearth of R&D, that is overly dependent on intercorporate trade, and that lacks incentives to develop exports beyond the continent.
Canada has also had to deal with growing pressures from large American cultural industries, which bring the "free market" approach of the United States into conflict with the "regulated" approach of Canada.
The Committee heard many expressions of concern about American influence and Canadian dependency.
Yet we were told that too few Canadians were willing to look reality in the face.
According to John Saul, "This Canadian pattern is getting worse, not better. . .short periods of misrepresentation and lying to ourselves, followed by long periods of denial and then by a passive acceptance of a situation that has been created on false pretences."
Few of those who had misgivings about the effects of economic integration on Canadian independence advocated withdrawal from the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Some witnesses even suggested that North America's deepening economic integration would ultimately require an economic union with supranational institutions.
On the other hand, there were others, particularly in the cultural and academic communities, who advocated a more spirited defence of Canadian independence based on a vigorous Canadian culture, as discussed in Chapter 6.
We believe this multidimensional relationship requires a multidimensional strategy.
As only one of the actors in the relationship on the Canadian side, the federal government cannot set the agenda by itself, but it can set the tone and influence the framework.
It can make clear its intention to be active in the projection of Canada in the United States,
to be resolute in the defence of Canadian independence, to be insistent on respect for the rules of the game and the practice of true reciprocity, but also to be mindful of the need to manage disputes constructively.
Canada has as much right as the United States to promote its interests, and should not voluntarily limit its sovereignty more than the United States is willing to do.
As many witnesses told us, there are many aspects of US. foreign policy, such as the backlog in their UN contributions, that give rise to grave concerns in Canada.
There are also unilateral US. trade measures that, in our eyes, do not represent the "level playing field" Canadians have been led to expect.
Canada should make those concerns known in a forthright way.
At the same time it has a duty to choose forms and channels of communication that will be consistent with its position as a friend and ally.
In any case foreign policy positions should not be decided in Ottawa on the basis of whether they are for or against US. policies, but rather on the basis of Canada's best independent judgment of the issues.
Canada must remain true to itself.
Such a strategy should contain regional and multilateral elements as well.
Canada should not only work for the primacy of rules over power as the basis for the bilateral relationship, but should also work to strengthen rules-based regimes in regional and multinational forums.
A priority area is trade and investment, where the adoption of a subsidies code is urgently needed, as we have already pointed out in Chapter 3.
The strategy should be to "multilateralize" Canada-US. relations as much as possible by forming ad hoc coalitions with like-minded countries and bolstering multilateral institutions, in the hope of reinforcing the constraints on unilateral actions.
For this purpose Canada should seek strategic partnerships with key countries in other regions, as suggested below under "regionalism".
In the last analysis, however, the success of such a multidimensional strategy will depend on how it is managed in Canada, on whether the government can articulate a vision capable of mobilizing a national effort of reaffirmation, and can persuade all the actors to get their act together in a Team Canada effort.
This will happen only if the provinces are willing to co-operate, if the private sector is prepared to buy in, if the cultural and academic communities rally behind it.
Above all, it will be necessary for the Canadian public to recognize that the future role of Canada, and indeed its very shape, are at stake.
The Committee believes that, in managing the Canada-US. relationship, special account should be taken of three basic factors:
the differences that distinguish our two countries, as well as the similarities;
the disparity of economic and military power between us;
and the inherent tension between independence and integration, which should be resolved in a co-operative way.
The Committee recommends that Canadian policy be driven by the need to protect our vital interests: the preservation of Canadian sovereignty and independence, and the capacity to play the sort of active and independent role in the world that Canadians demand.
We believe that such a policy requires a commensurate allocation of resources to the instruments to implement it, be they in the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade and its missions abroad, other government departments engaged abroad, or in Parliament.
Given the substantial powers now being exercised by the US. Congress, particularly in trade matters affecting Canadian interests, it is necessary to find effective ways to bring Canadian concerns directly to the attention of Congressmen and Senators.
We believe the Canada-US. Inter-Parliamentary Group has this potential.
However, Parliament should revise its selection procedures to ensure that future delegations comprise Parliamentarians chosen for their knowledge of specific items on the agenda.
The Group should also work closely with the relevant standing committees and the Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Regionalism
Regionalism is a post-World War II phenomenon, but it is having an increasingly important effect on the evolving shape of international relations.
Some regional groupings, such as the Organization of American states (OAS), the Organization of African Unity and the League of Arab States, formed to promote functional co-operation on the basis of shared political interests, have existed for some time.
Some, like the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), were products of the Cold War period.
One of the most ambitious regional groupings is the European Union (EU).
Originally the European Economic Community (EEC), it was formed to promote economic integration as a means to serve political and security ends: to put an end to Europe's fratricidal wars; and to put Europe on a more equal footing with the United States, on the one hand, and the Soviet Union, on the other.
More recently economic integration on a regional or sub-regional basis has been driven primarily by globalization.
The mobility of capital and other factors of production has made nonsense of the traditional concepts of national economies and has persuaded many governments that they have more to gain from competition than from protection.
Export promotion has replaced import substitution, and this requires access to the neighbours' markets.
The Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), MERCOSUR in South America, and NAFTA in North America are all products of this trend.
And the prospect is that economic integration on a continental basis will accelerate in Europe, where the EU is poised to take in new members, in the Americas, where new candidates for membership may soon be knocking on NAFTA's door, and perhaps soon in Asia as well.
Thus globalization seems to be accompanied by a trend toward continentalization.
Where does Canada fit into this picture?
There used to be a time when Canada was called "a regional power without a region".
No more.
With its membership in NAFTA Canada is now part of the evolving North American region, and should realistically be looking forward to the prospect of becoming part of a region spanning all the Americas.
This raises two important questions: what should Canada's role in this hemisphere be?
and what should Canada's role outside the hemisphere be?
In this connection, the Committee drew two main conclusions from its visit to Washington:
first, that the United States is the dominant power in inter-American relations and the most important partner of most, if not all, the countries of the Americas, including Canada;
and second, that Canada must either make the necessary effort, and devote the necessary resources, to shape its own future, or accept the fact that the hemisphere's future, shaped by the United States, will shape Canada.
At the same time, we should be asking ourselves whether this hemisphere is, or should be, the limit of Canada's vision.
Surely not.
Canada also has important transatlantic and transpacific interests -- economic, political and security interests -- as well as global interests which can only be served by being actively engaged in those other environments.
It would not be consistent with those interests if Canada allowed itself to be confined to North America, or saw the world divided into rival blocs.
Canada must therefore try to reconcile its new vocation in the Western Hemisphere with its wider vocation by redoubling its efforts to build bridges between continents.
We have a security bridge across the Atlantic in the form of NATO.
We should prepare for the future addition of an economic track to that bridge in the form of a North Atlantic free trade area.
Both the Canada-European Community (EC) and the US.-EC Transatlantic Declarations of 1990 point the way in that direction.
We have a new economic bridge across the Pacific in the form of the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) forum.
Should we not be adding some day a security track to that bridge?
These are forward-looking questions which we think should be actively considered by the government and added to the agenda of the G-7.
Canada has interests in all regions of the world, but the nature of those interests varies from one region to another, and indeed within regions, since the regions themselves are not homogeneous.
In Chapter 4, we considered Canada's particular interests in the circumpolar region.
The following brief comments on other major regions are perforce of a very general nature.
Since the end of World War II, Canada's security interests have been the main underpinning of Canada's relations with Europe.
The Cold War divided those interests, as it did Europe itself: in Western Europe, Canada contributed to deterrence and defence, while in Eastern Europe, Canada contributed to dialogue and détente, to the extent that conditions allowed.
The end of the Cold War has opened the possibility of making Europe whole again, and of bringing the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union into a collective security regime for the whole continent, and Canada can contribute to that through NATO and the CSCE (see Chapter 2).
At the same time those countries need technical and other assistance to help them make the difficult transition to democracy and market economies,
and it is in Canada's interest to contribute to this effort (see Chapter 5).
The economic importance of the European Union is bound to grow, while political integration is likely to remain embryonic for some time, as we observed in Chapter 3.
In this new Europe, Germany reunified will play a strong central role.
In spite of the opportunities, Canadian trade and investment interests in Western Europe have tended to decline in relative importance in recent years, regardless of efforts at the governmental level to revive them and to develop more substantial political and cultural exchanges.
EU markets are highly competitive, but the quality of Canadian exports, in terms of value added, is high, and high-tech exports are enjoying remarkable growth.
The EU remains important to Canada not only in terms of shared values, interests and history, but also in the context of the UN, multilateral economic institutions and the NATO alliance.
We were told in Brussels that the EU would like closer co-operation with Canada on matters of common concern.
In general, witnesses told the Committee that Canada now had a mature trade and investment relationship with Europe in which governments had already set the framework for private sector linkages.
Moreover, in policy terms, Canada shares many of Europe's problems related to mature economies -- unemployment, ageing population, social safety net, etc.
Some deplored the weakening of traditional educational, cultural and scientific ties with Europe, and stressed the importance of reinvigorating and reinforcing them.
Canadian participation in the European Space Agency, the Erasmus project and other European R&D programs were mentioned in this connection.
The Canada-EEC Framework Agreement of 1976 continues to provide the structure for co-operation in many fields, including industrial policy.
A new Canada-EU Science and Technology Co-operation Agreement is expected in 1995.
There is no doubt that the Asia-Pacific region has grown in importance not only for Canada but for the world as a whole, as has already been pointed out in Chapters 2 and 3.
It may well become the dominant region in the next century.
Asia boasts the largest market (2.5 billion people) and the highest growth rates,
and the Committee was told that 50% of world trade would be in Asia by the year 2000 (Ridley, 14:22 and 14:39).
Canada's trade and immigration links with this region have expanded remarkably in recent years, with Japan now Canada's second largest trading partner.
But Canada's share of trade with the region has recently declined (Wilkinson, 13:6) and Canada's exports are still too dependent on raw materials and semi-processed goods.
Fifty percent of the immigrants to Canada now come from the Asia-Pacific region and 5% of Canadians trace their ancestry to that region.
Canada is interested not only in the economic progress of the region but also in its political stability and its security.
These interests should be pursued in a mutually reinforcing way, as we pointed out in Chapter 2.
According to Foreign Affairs Minister Ouellet, Canada is determined to be a creative force in the development of new regional institutions such as APEC, which provides a new framework for growth, 
and ASEAN, which offers a broad-based political and economic partnership with non-member countries through the ASEAN Regional Forum.
Only recently the Asia-Pacific Foundation of Canada has been designated as the site of a new APEC Study Centre in Canada.
Canada's interests in Latin America are primarily in trade and investment aid, and, to an increasing extent, security, 
and there are ample opportunities to develop more substantial relations with countries in the region as a complement to the future extension of NAFTA.
Areas for co-operation include scholarships, judicial standards, and administrative and financial management.
A number of witnesses told the Committee that Latin America was one region of the world in which Canada was considered a natural partner (Hal Klepak, 29:7) and that the countries there would welcome closer relations with Canada as a possible counterweight to their own ties with the United States (Wilkinson, 13:13).
In this way, Canada is helping transform the OAS into a truly hemispheric [rather than a US.-dominated] institution.
Witnesses also noted that Latin America was closer to Canada physically and culturally than Asia-Pacific, that it was open to Canadian technology, and that Quebec had a comparative advantage in cultural ties with the region.
Private sector contacts had grown, and Canadian trade and investment with Mexico had almost doubled in the five years up to 1992.
We were also told that the countries of the region were firmly launched on the road to democratization and economic reform, but there were still serious problems of poverty, environmental degradation, unequal wealth distribution, education and public health.
Canada's chief involvement in Africa will continue to be development aid, humanitarian and social justice issues, but with security overtones, for the foreseeable future.
Their precise form varies greatly from one country to another, however, depending on the state of progress in implementing economic and political reform.
The differences are enormous, from South Africa to Rwanda to the Sahel to North Africa to the Horn of Africa.
In the testimony heard by the Committee there were sharp differences of view between businesses involved in international development in Africa and most NGOs, the former stressing the importance of private sector development and the necessity of structural adjustment programs,
and the latter arguing that structural adjustment programs perpetuated poverty, and that greater attention should be given to community-based projects delivered by the NGOs.
There was some concern that Africa risked marginalization (Campbell, 23:15).
Finally, we should not overlook the Middle East, although it was mentioned only in passing as a security concern during the testimony.
The fact is that there are issues at stake there of war and peace and the reconciliation of ancient animosities that interest many Canadians, and where Canada can, and does, play a significant role 
(viz. Canada is making a valuable contribution to the Steering Group of the Middle East Peace Process, and is chairing the Refugee Working Group, because it enjoys the confidence of all the parties).
The government has asked us to recommend regional priorities but we think that the criteria that should guide Canada's policies and the setting of priorities should be based on the functions that engage Canadian interests rather than on strictly geographic considerations.
Regional priorities will emerge from this process but they will derive from an assessment of Canadian interests, values and comparative advantages.
Looking from one region to another, as this report has done, Canada's vital interests emerge as distinct policy objectives: 
strengthening shared security, promoting trade and building shared prosperity, sharing sustainable development, alleviating poverty, and projecting Canadian cultures abroad.
The previous chapters have examined each of these objectives in detail.
In doing so, the report has identified priorities for each region.
Within each region priority should be assigned to developing bilateral relations with key countries with which Canada can develop strategic partnerships for mutually beneficial co-operation in fields of particular importance to Canada.
The Committee recommends that the government set policy and program priorities on the basis of objectives that reflect Canadian interests, values, and comparative advantages.
Within regions, we should seek strategic bilateral partnerships, based on a combination of a country's regional importance, its political or cultural ties with Canada, and its potential contribution to the achievement of Canada's objectives.
Multilateralism
We are using the term "multilateralism" in the sense of a policy orientation directed toward broadly based international groupings and institutions formed to foster global co-operation in one or more policy areas.
In this sense multilateralism is already a well-tried tradition of Canadian diplomacy and will probably assume even more importance in the future.
As we have noted before, it is clearly in Canada's interest to do what it can to resist being marginalized in North America, to build as many bridges as possible between continents, and to prevent the formation of rival blocs.
In this context multilateralism and bilateralism should be regarded, not as alternatives but as complementary and mutually supporting ways of moderating the divisive tendencies of regionalism.
Canadians are inveterate joiners but Canada cannot do everything everywhere.
The future thrust of Canadian foreign policy should therefore be "directed multilateralism", targeted at the multilateral institutions best suited to Canadian requirements, and combined with selected bilateral approaches to co-operation with those like-minded countries best situated to help advance the common cause.
There should be two criteria for such targeting: pertinence of the multilateral institutions for Canadian interests; and effective performance.
What are Canada's interests in some of the major multilateral institutions?
In one category are the Commonwealth and la Francophonie, which provide valuable bridges between continents and races, and which offer important avenues for Canada to project abroad its two official languages and its cultural diversity.
The Commonwealth has undergone considerable evolution over the years, and now that South Africa has rejoined, may take a new lease on life.
La Francophonie has also been evolving and now includes the participation of the provinces of Quebec and New Brunswick as "participating governments" along with Canada as "member state".
In another category are the UN and its associated agencies.
They offer the principal forums for Canada to participate in international action to address such global issues as peace and security, economic and social development, the environment, human rights and international law.
An important aim of Canadian foreign policy must therefore be to ensure -- or rather to restore --the credibility and effectiveness of the UN as a global institution.
Another target should be the new World Trade Organization (WTO), which is crucial to the development of a rules-based international trade system.
Still other important targets are the International Financial Institutions (IFIs), which have a central role to play in promoting sustainable development in an atmosphere of financial stability.
And finally there is the Group of Seven industrialized nations (G-7) which, though hardly global in composition, does have a global agenda and is in a position, if the members want to use it, to act as a co-ordinating mechanism for their foreign, economic and security policies.
The trouble is that these organizations, as they presently operate, fall far short of the institutional framework necessary to support the sort of multilateralism we envisage.
With the exception of the WTO, which has not yet been set up, all the institutions mentioned in the preceding paragraph are in need of review and reform in the light of the transforming changes that the world has gone through since their founding.
In Chapter 2, we dealt with the UN Security Council and the regional organizations, such as NATO and the CSCE, which are working increasingly closely with the UN in the security field.
In Chapter 3, we dealt with the IFIs and the G-7 as well as with the WTO.
In the remainder of this chapter, we will deal with the reform of the rest of the UN family.
Support for the UN and for the principles set out in its Charter has been a central feature of Canadian foreign policy since the organization was founded in 1945.
Those principles continue to reflect Canadian values and to merit Canadian support but it must be recognized that the organization has lost some credibility because of administrative and financial difficulties.
The UN is also in chronic financial difficulties due in large part to arrears in the contributions of member states, including particularly Russia and the United States.
As Canadians made clear in the course of the Committee's hearings, they want to see the UN re-established as a real force in the world, and are looking for a thoroughgoing reform of the whole organization.
The time is ripe, with the 50th anniversary of the UN coming up next year, and Canada should take an active, indeed a leading, part in the review.
One of the principal contributions to this review so far has been made by the Canadian Committee for the 50th Anniversary of the UN.
Among their more important recommendations are the following:
With respect to finances, Canada should urge that member states that are in arrears for two years should lose their voting rights (in accordance with Article 19 of the Charter).
It should also support the appointment of an Auditor-General for the UN, accountable to the General Assembly, and the parallel creation of an internal management review system accountable to the Secretary-General (since this recommendation was formulated, the UN has in fact appointed an Inspector-General).
* With respect to international development, Canada should urge the creation within the UN of a Sustainable Development Security Council, a high-level decision-making body with full co-ordination powers over specialized agencies.
* With respect to human rights, Canada should press for greater co-ordination between UN specialized agencies and Secretariat functions, should urge the Secretary-General to create a high-level task force to recommend steps in that direction,
and should press for rapid implementation of a program of action for the newly created High Commissioner for Human Rights to ensure co-ordination with the High Commissioner for Refugees and an effective UN field presence when human rights are violated or are in jeopardy.
* With respect to the Secretariat, Canada should press for simplification and strengthening of the structure, for competitive selection methods for the appointment of the Secretary-General and the senior officers, and for gender equity at all levels.
* With respect to democratization, Canada should support the participation of NGOs in the work of the UN, and should encourage proposals for the addition of a UN Parliamentary Assembly.
We think these proposals deserve consideration by the Canadian government.
They go in the direction of putting the UN's finances and management practices on a sound footing, entrenching the principle of accountability, and improving the effectiveness and efficiency of UN operations.
Critical to this last point is improved co-ordination between the UN and its specialized agencies, which have hitherto resisted efforts by the Secretary-General or the General Assembly to bring them into line.
This will not be achieved in fact until member governments, which after all are members of both the UN and the specialized agencies, ensure consistency and co-ordination in the policies they support in the various bodies.
We commend this objective to the Government of Canada.
The Committee reaffirms Canada's commitment to the goal of a rules-based international system, built on expanding the application of international law, 
and on making multilateral institutions more effective, better managed and more democratically accountable.
For this purpose the Committee recommends a strategy of "directed multilateralism", that is, a strategy which gives priority to those institutions that best serve Canadian interests.
This should be combined with vigorous bilateral co-operation with like-minded countries best situated to help advance the common cause.
Beyond the Commonwealth and la Francophonie, the targets for this strategy should include the United Nations (UN) and the specialized agencies, the World Trade Organization (WTO), the International Financial Institutions and the Group of Seven (G-7).
Canada should actively promote the early establishment of the WTO.
It should also promote urgent and thoroughgoing reform of the UN system and the Bretton Woods institutions.
The relevant standing committees of Parliament should reassess Canada's membership in the various multilateral institutions, with a view to making recommendations about its future participation.
It is the Committee's conclusion that it would be undesirable as well as unrealistic for Canada to try to choose between bilateralism, regionalism and multilateralism.
We must play in all three games.
The only choice is how we combine them.
Clearly the objective should be to maximize Canada's leverage to protect its independence and its interests, to promote rules-based regimes, and to strengthen the international institutions best suited to provide this framework.
A combination of strategies, such as are recommended in this chapter, seem to us to be the most apt to serve that objective.
CHAPTER 8: THE DEMOCRATIZATION OF FOREIGN POLICY
In the guidance paper tabled by the Minister of Foreign Affairs in the House when the Committee was formed, the government indicated its interest in the "democratization of the foreign policy process ... with greater involvement by Canadians directly and through Parliament".
This concluding chapter of our report represents our reflections on the review process and our thoughts on how it might be improved.
Even prior to the Committee's formation, the Minister of Foreign Affairs had written to several hundred non-governmental organizations (NGOs), companies, consultants and universities, most of which had received support or contracts from the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA).
They were informed of plans to form the Committee and invited to submit their views to it, particularly with respect to international assistance.
As a result of this invitation, publicity about the Committee's formation and its hearings across Canada, the Committee ultimately received 561 briefs.
The attached table indicates that more than half of all the briefs received came from NGOs, most of whom were involved in international assistance.
In addition, many of the business briefs and a number of those from universities concerned CIDA's policies and funding practices.
The Committee decided to meet all those who had submitted briefs by June 1994 or who had indicated they intended to do so.
To do this effectively, we agreed to hold hearings across Canada.
To increase our coverage in the limited time available, we divided into three panels of seven or eight MPs and Senators, 
one travelling to the East (St. John's, Halifax, Quebec City and Montreal), one to the West (Calgary, Vancouver and Yellowknife) and one to the Prairies and Ontario (Regina, Winnipeg and Toronto).
This practice proved to be so effective -- the smaller panels allowed members to participate more actively -- that we continued to sit in panels in order to hear more witnesses once we returned to Ottawa.
In all, the Committee held over 80 meetings in which we heard more than 550 organizations or individuals.
Rather than give each organization 15 or 20 minutes, we normally grouped several organizations or individuals with related concerns.
Not only did this give them more time before the Committee, it also generated some valuable give and take between the witnesses.
In addition to national organizations, which we heard mainly in Ottawa, their local branches frequently made submissions in other parts of the country.
While this produced some repetition, we were impressed by the careful preparations made by most witnesses.
We received relatively few submissions relating to security and to trade and finance issues.
Since these were central issues in the mandate that we had been given, we decided to organize roundtables composed of four to six specialists with differing perspectives on these and other policy areas that were critical to the review.
Lasting three hours, the roundtables proved to be so effective at generating well-focused discussion and debate that we arranged 21 such meetings.
In addition to roundtables on security, trade, international assistance and regional perspectives, we organized meetings on sustainable development, Canada's northern foreign policy, the East Coast fishery, education and culture, communications and foreign policy actors.
The evidence generated by this process was substantial, over 10,000 pages including 500 briefs.
To assist Committee Members to take full account of this volume of material, a set of eight issue papers was prepared for their review, one on each of the main themes in the Committee's mandate.
These papers reported on how the international situation was assessed by witnesses, and summarized points of view and recommendations made by them on each theme in a systematic and organized manner.
To obtain in-depth, expert views on the major issue areas, the Committee commissioned four authors to prepare position papers:
namely, Dr. John Ralston Saul on "Culture and Foreign Policy"; Professor André Martens on "Foreign Aid and Development Revisited"; Professor Denis Stairs on "Contemporary Security Issues"; and Dr. Sylvia Ostry and Dr. Alan Alexandroff on "The Challenge of Global Trade, Investment and Finance for Canada".
These papers will be published in a separate volume.
Finally, to ensure that we were aware of how the major foreign policy issues were perceived abroad and how Canada was regarded, the Committee again divided into the three panels to make short visits to Washington, Brussels and New York City.
Each of these visits was packed with a continuous series of meetings with representatives of major international organizations, think tanks, Canadian and foreign representatives, and international NGOs.
In Brussels, the panel heard not only from officials of NATO and the European Union, but also from the head of the CSCE Secretariat, who flew in from Vienna, and from a senior representative of the OECD in Paris.
In Washington, the panel met with representatives of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund as well as of the Organization of American States,
and in New York the panel met with representatives of the UN and its specialized agencies.
The main challenge our Committee faced was shortage of time.
Seven months is a very limited period to cover the vast range of issues set out in the guidance paper, especially for a committee meeting for the first time.
Inevitably, we have not had time to go into many subjects in the depth we would have liked.
Nor have we been able to do full justice to the broad range of issues addressed by the hundreds of individuals and groups who contributed to the review.
Given our wide mandate and the limited time frame, we had to focus on a select number of issues that we decided required priority attention.
For this reason, at various points in our report, we have identified subjects which we suggest should receive on-going consideration by one or other of the Standing Committees of Foreign Affairs of the Senate and the House of Commons.
For other subjects, we propose a more detailed one-time inquiry.
We are appreciative of the thoughtful analysis and sometimes detailed recommendations that we received on issues that we could not adequately consider.
These we commend to the government and Parliament for further consideration.
To aid in this process, we are making available for wider circulation the position papers that we commissioned and the issue papers that summarized the testimony that we received.
In addition to the meetings organized by our Committee, we are aware that the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade has undertaken several consultations, some of which were completed in time for us to take account of them.
In particular, we have taken note of the report of the Steering Committee for the International Business Development Review, chaired by L.R. (Red) Wilson, Chief Executive Officer of BCE Inc., presented to the Minister for International Trade.
Members of our Committee had the opportunity to attend the National Forum on Canada's International Relations held on March 21 and 22.
They found the exercise less useful than it might have been.
Should the government decide to make this an annual consultation of the Canadian public, we believe it would be more useful if a broader public participation were sought, if a limited number of key issues were identified as the main focus of discussion, and if the procedure allowed for more debate of the conclusions.
Further to concentrate discussion, we suggest that background papers reviewing those issues be prepared and circulated to participants in advance.
At the same time, the Committee believes there is a need for continuing dialogue and education on international relations.
In today's interdependent world, international relations have an increasingly direct effect on the well-being of Canadians.
They should therefore have the opportunity to deepen their understanding of the complexities of foreign policy, and to have an input into decisions that affect them.
One proposal made in this context is for a "Centre for Foreign Policy Development" that would identify priorities for analysis and contribute to the public debate.
One of its functions would presumably be to promote dialogue among government, business, academic, professional and non-governmental organizations, a process in which we believe Parliamentarians should be actively involved.
Likewise, we think representatives of the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade, the Department of National Defence and CIDA should participate in the dialogue, both contributing their knowledge and assuming greater accountability.
Through our hearings, we have become aware of the significant amount of research already being undertaken in Canadian universities, research institutes, business and labour groups and through umbrella NGO bodies.
The vast body of research being undertaken abroad is also readily accessible.
We are convinced that this greater dialogue among the different communities would help to make this research more relevant to the diverse needs of Canadians and better known to a wider public.
For this reason, we believe that the proposed Centre for Foreign Policy Development or an equivalent institutional arrangement, such as a remodelled Canadian Institute for International Peace and Security, should give special attention to building bridges between different groups of Canadians.
Some of our members have indicated that they plan to organize town hall meetings on foreign policy issues in their constituencies.
We applaud this initiative, which should help Canadians to appreciate the extent to which international relations of all kinds affect their lives.
Jobs, the physical environment in which we live, the ethnic composition of the country; these, and many other situations, are all directly affected by developments abroad and how Canada responds.
Town hall meetings would be an effective way to get across this message to ordinary Canadians.
If Parliamentarians are to play a larger role in assisting Canadians to appreciate the impact of international relations on their daily lives, it is important that they themselves be well informed.
The Committees on Foreign Affairs and Trade and on Defence of the two Houses can help to do this.
Beyond this, however, there might be advantage in experimenting with informal consultative procedures that are practised in the Scandinavian countries, as well as in Germany and France.
In those countries, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs meet in closed session from time to time to discuss pending problems with the members of their respective parliamentary committees responsible for international relations.
Introduction of this practice in Canada would give Parliamentarians an appreciation of the complexities of international problems, as well as providing an informal means for Ministers to consult those with a special interest in foreign relations.
It would also strengthen the hand of Canadian Parliamentarians when they meet with their counterparts abroad.
To the many Canadians who went to the time and trouble to give us their advice, we express our gratitude.
Drawing on their experience, this report provides our best judgment on the main foreign policy issues that Canada faces at this time of rapid change here at home and abroad.
In thinking about the testimony of Canadians, we have been particularly struck by their idealism and their deep morality.
Canadians want to make the world a better place.
These sentiments and aspirations are, we trust, reflected in this report that we submit to Parliament. OTTAWA, Ontario K1A 0G2 February 7, 1995
The Honourable Allan J. MacEachen, P.C. The Honourable Jean-Robert Gauthier Co-Chairs
Special Joint Committee reviewing Canadian Foreign Policy Parliament of Canada OTTAWA K1A 0A6
Dear Co-Chairs:
We are pleased to forward to you, in the attached document, the Government's comprehensive response to each recommendation of the Report of the Special Joint Committee reviewing Canadian Foreign Policy entitled Canada's Foreign Policy: Principles and Priorities for the Future.
On behalf of the Government, we would like to express our appreciation for your work and that of the Special Joint Committee in producing such a substantive and thoughtful report.
Your observations and recommendations have been thoroughly reviewed by the Government and have contributed significantly to shaping the Government's Foreign Policy Statement, which is also enclosed with this letter.
The Government looks forward to an even closer working relationship with Parliament in months and years ahead to ensure that policy formulation continues to receive public input and that the implementation of foreign policy is subject to ongoing assessment.
As you will note, the Government agrees with the main directions advanced in your report to guide Canadian Foreign Policy.
Moreover, the Government agrees with the overwhelming majority of your many useful recommendations.
The Government shares the Committee's assessment of the growing importance of international affairs to the daily well-being of Canadians.
Foreign affairs are more and more the concern of all Canadians, as expressed individually or through partners such as the provinces, the private sector, NGOs and other Canadian institutions.
Your report, and the Government's Statement, reflect the deeply-held values which Canadians want to see carried forward by Canada abroad.
Canadians want an active and independent foreign policy.
The Government's Statement notes, as did your report, the important changes that have occurred in the world, as well as the specific challenges and the opportunities facing Canada.
The Government agrees that it must be selective in its interventions.
For this reason, and given fiscal constraints, the Government will address its foreign policy objectives through reallocation of resources.
In light of these factors, the Government has decided to focus Canada's foreign policy on three key objectives: promoting prosperity and employment; protecting our security, within a stable global framework; and projecting Canadian values and culture.
Allow us to elaborate on these objectives in the order laid out in your report.
On security, the Government embraces the need to adopt a broader concept of security encompassing both military and non-military factors.
Serious threats to collective, shared security over the longer term derive from global environmental, demographic, migration, ethnic, health, and development trends.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade will establish an office dedicated to the management of global issues, reporting to an assistant deputy minister, to bring greater coherence to Canada's policies relevant to the broad non-military global security agenda.
As announced in the Defence White Paper, peacekeeping will be a primary international contribution of the re-balanced Canadian Armed Forces.
Canada will support reform of the UN and the UN Security Council (the Committee has made helpful suggestions in this regard) and will seek membership on the Security Council for the 1999-2000 term.
Canada will remain active in NORAD, NATO and the OSCE and in the security dialogue affecting Latin America, the Asia-Pacific, and Africa.
Further details are provided in the Statement.
On trade policy, the Government will continue to build a multilateral trading system based on rules and not power relationships.
The Government will pursue unfinished business from the Uruguay Round.
As suggested by the Committee, it will pursue appropriate linkages between trade policy and issues such as human rights, the environment, and labour standards.
In some cases, these can be engaged directly at the WTO; in other cases, further study and consensus-building is required at the OECD or in other institutions such as the ILO.
The Government will vigorously defend our trading interests vis-à-vis the United States.
It will, as suggested by the Committee, seek to multilateralize relations where possible, for example, through expansion of the NAFTA and by encouraging work now underway on a Free Trade Agreement of the Americas (FTAA).
The Government will seek agreement on trade remedy laws through the NAFTA Working Groups on Subsidies/Countervail and Antidumping.
Furthermore, the Government will explore the creation of a NAFTA-EU Free Trade Agreement, as announced by the Prime Minister in France shortly after the tabling of the Committee's report, and supports APEC's call for free trade in the Asia-Pacific region by 2020.
The Government will continue with its Trade Team Canada approaches used in Asia last year and in Latin America earlier this year.
The Government will lead Halifax Economic Summit discussions this June on the reform of institutions of global economic governance, including the International Financial Institutions (IFIs), and will push for a long-term approach to their positive evolution.
To increase transparency and accountability, the Government intends to prepare annual reports on Canada's participation in all multilateral development banks (building on the current practice of submitting reports on the Bretton Woods institutions and the EBRD) and will make available to Parliamentary Committees briefings by Ministers and officials.
On international business development, the Government has carefully reviewed the proposal to establish a joint public-private consortium.
It has concluded, however, that the valuable links between the Trade Commissioner Service and the remainder of the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade outweigh the benefits which might arise from a public-private consortium centred on the Trade Commissioner Service.
Nevertheless, as the Statement attests, the Government will extensively reform its international business development approaches in the spirit of the Committee's recommendations.
Furthermore, as suggested by the Committee, and as the Statement makes clear, the Government will pay greater attention to emerging markets in Asia-Pacific and in the Americas and will concentrate financial support on Small and Medium-sized Enterprises.
Marketing Canada's cultural and educational products will be an integral part of its strategy.
The Government will also work with the provinces and the private sector to reinforce the international orientation of Canadian business.
On the environment and sustainable development, the Government will maintain an active approach in line with the commitments made at the Earth Summit in Rio.
In addition to existing priorities (internationally agreed rules on high seas fishing;
internationally agreed rules on sustainable management of forests;
trade rules that support sustainable development;
the North American environmental agenda, including transboundary issues and implementation of the North American Agreement on Environmental Co-operation;
slowing global climate change;
implementing the Environmental Industries Strategy;
applying environmental assessment guidelines),
the Government will accord greater priority to circumpolar co-operation and reform of international institutions addressing sustainable development.
The Government will seek ratification of the UN Convention III on the Law of the Sea once it has reviewed domestic legislation to ensure its conformity with the provisions of the Convention.
On development assistance, the Government agrees with the need for improvements in each of the areas identified by the Committee.
The Government has responded with concrete steps to clarify the mandate and program priorities for Official Development Assistance.
In addition, it will strengthen development partnerships, improve effectiveness, and better report results to Canadians.
These measures will be directed at strengthening the sense of purpose, the effectiveness, and the accountability of the program.
The Government believes that the measures we have put in place to ensure a clear mandate and stable goals for ODA, to strengthen accountability and to provide a stronger role for Parliament, make a legislative mandate to guide ODA unnecessary.
In keeping with the three key objectives for foreign policy, the Government believes that the purpose of Canada's ODA should be to support sustainable development in developing countries in order to reduce poverty and to contribute to a more secure, equitable and prosperous world.
This statement of purpose allows the ODA program to play an important role in addressing the broader security agenda, while restating our basic commitment to poverty alleviation and economic and social justice (the three are, of course, inter-related as the Committee has pointed out).
Canada's ODA will concentrate on the following six program areas and involve activities at the local, institutional, and policy level:
basic human needs (its share to increase to 25% of ODA as suggested by the Committee);
women in development; infrastructure services;
human rights, democracy, and good governance;
private sector development;
and the environment.
The Government is committed to making progress towards the 0.7% ODA/GNP target when Canada's fiscal situation permits
but, given current fiscal realities, it must be stressed that all Government programs are being reviewed, and Canada's ODA program is no exception.
The Government congratulates the Committee for its ground-breaking work concerning the projection of Canadian culture and learning abroad and agrees with the stress placed on the importance of culture and learning.
The Committee's detailed recommendations, and the studies prepared for it will serve as valuable points of reference for the Government as it works with interested provinces and others to advance Canadian objectives in this area.
In this regard, Québec's and New Brunswick's special positions within la Francophonie are assets for Canadian foreign policy.
Canadians told the Committee they want their governments to work together to promote the creative talent and learning of Canadians abroad.
The Government agrees.
Respect for human rights has been and remains a priority area of concern and action for Canadians.
From the drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to that of the recently concluded Convention on the Rights of the Child, Canada has been in the vanguard of those fighting to uphold human freedoms and dignity.
The Government reaffirms its commitment towards the International Centre for Human Rights and Democratic Development.
This Centre will continue to play an important role in the advancement of Canadian objectives.
The Government regards respect for human rights not only as a fundamental value, but also as a crucial element in the development of democratic societies at peace with each other.
The essential challenge is to decide how we can best influence other governments to respect basic human rights.
Our ultimate aim is not to punish countries and innocent populations whose governments abuse human rights but rather to change behaviour and to induce governments to respect their peoples' rights.
Responses to specific situations require careful balancing of many considerations, above all the effectiveness of the means of influence at our disposal.
Canadian efforts to support human rights will rely on a variety of means, including dialogue and co-ordinated efforts through multilateral fora.
Development assistance is a constructive way to address human rights, democracy and governance issues.
Canada will continue to work with a broad range of partners, including governments, NGOs, and multilateral organizations to promote our objectives.
Assistance will support such activities as peace and reconciliation initiatives, 
human rights education, widening access to legal remedies,
strengthening legislatures and judicial systems
and increasing the capacity of organizations and other representatives of civil society to participate fully and effectively in decision-making in their countries.
High profile aid and trade measures may play a role in responding to gross, systematic, and persistent violations of internationally agreed human rights standards.
Canadian assistance, for example, must not reward or give the impression of rewarding such government behaviour.
This can be done in a number of ways, as the Committee has suggested.
The Government will consider its actions on a case-by-case basis.
In addition, trade in sensitive goods, such as military exports, must not be allowed to bolster repression.
Canadian leadership in this area is demonstrated by our controls on the export of military goods, which are among the most restrictive of Western countries.
These controls deny export permits when, among other reasons, the goods are destined to a country where they may be used to abuse human rights or where there are actual or imminent hostilities.
Punitive bilateral action in isolation from other countries, however, usually presents the least effective means of achieving results.
In the case of trade, it may hurt Canada more than it will change the behaviour of offending governments.
Multilateral action, based on international standards and procedures, afford both legitimacy and increased leverage.
In this connection, it is only very rarely the case that promoting human rights and pursuing trade are mutually exclusive objectives.
Indeed, trade and growing economic prosperity often nurture a more open society.
Experience points to the effectiveness of exposing closed countries to the international community and its values in terms of increasing pressure for the respect of human rights.
Nevertheless, in extreme cases and where deemed effective, multilaterally-agreed trade sanctions may play a role in applying pressure to change egregious behaviour, as was the case in South Africa.
Canada is prepared to work hard on consensus multilateral approaches.
Canada will continue to lead on human rights issues at the UN, the OSCE, Commonwealth, la Francophonie, and the OAS.
These fora often provide the most effective means for influencing governments.
At the IFIs and in various aid donor groups, Canada will also emphasize the need to consider a recipient's commitment to good governance.
In particular, Canada will seek concerted action with others to influence governments which spend large sums on arms rather than on education and housing for their people.
This review of foreign policy does not represent an end.
Rather, it is the beginning of an on-going process.
In the future, the Government will conduct annually a National Forum on Canada's International Relations, keeping in mind the helpful suggestions that the Committee has made.
Based on the model of its regular consultations with the business community through the ITAC and SAGIT processes and with partners in the NGO/human rights community, 
the Government will expand and institutionalize this process by establishing a series of active consultations with other groups and individuals interested in the international dimensions of economic relations, development and political affairs.
The Government has also decided to create a mechanism within the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade to stimulate public consultations and research on foreign policy issues.
The Government will continue to consult Parliament regularly, through special debates and other means, when major foreign policy issues arise, and for advice in updating the directions of our foreign policy.
The Government looks to the relevant Standing Committees to open channels of public consultation.
In keeping with the Committee's suggestion, we would be pleased to schedule informal consultations between ourselves and the relevant Parliamentary Committees.
In closing, we would like again to thank the members of the Special Joint Committee for their exceptional contribution to the development of our foreign policy and in helping to ensure that this policy is one which Canadians can be proud of.
Yours sincerely, 
Honourable André Ouellet Honourable Roy MacLaren Minister of Foreign Affairs Minister for International Trade
Members of the Special Joint Committee reviewing Canadian Foreign Policy
Attachments (a/ Government Response to the Recommendations of the Special Joint Committee reviewing Canadian Foreign Policy
b/Foreign Policy Statement)
Government Response to the Recommendations of the Special Joint Parliamentary Committee reviewing Canadian Foreign Policy
The following document contains the Government's response to each recommendation of the Report of the Special Joint Parliamentary Committee reviewing Canadian Foreign Policy, entitled Canada's Foreign Policy:
Principles and Priorities for the Future.
In the Committee's report, the recommendations were not separated from the text nor were they numbered.
In this document, they have been numbered in the order in which they appear in the Committee's report, with the aim of ensuring that the response is comprehensive.
Chapter 1: Rethinking the Foreign Policy Agenda
*1.1 We should like to emphasize the need to ensure that the resources for the instruments of foreign policy, including the foreign service, be appropriately allocated and commensurate with the objectives of foreign policy that will emerge from this report.
Response The Government agrees that the resources at its disposal for pursuing Canada's objectives internationally must reflect the importance of the issues at stake.
However, it is also necessary to operate within the confines of the diminishing financial resources available in current circumstances.
The central objective of the Program Review now under way is to match resources with priorities in a situation that demands both restraint and innovation.
The Foreign Policy Review process is dedicated to ensuring effective pursuit of Canada's central objectives in a rapidly evolving international environment, at a time when the resources available to Government are limited.
The Government will keep its foreign operations under constant review to ensure that they stress our engagement in areas of long-term importance, and also that domestic and international policies are managed so as to maintain our capacity for effectively influencing world affairs and responding to change in the international environment.
The Government will adjust the allocation of available resources in accordance with evolving policy priorities, and will focus these on its three central foreign policy objectives:
promoting prosperity and employment;
protecting our security, within a stable global framework;
and -projecting Canadian values and culture.
Chapter 2: Strengthening Shared Security
*2.1 The Committee is convinced of the need to adopt a broader concept of security, encompassing both military and non-military factors.
The Committee further recommends that this concept be reflected both in the establishment of a high-level government mechanism, such as a Cabinet committee, and in a restructuring of the relevant Standing Committees of Parliament, in order to ensure that the various elements of security are addressed in an integrated manner.
Response The Government agrees on the need to adopt a broader concept of security.
In addition to taking into account traditional military threats, security policy must include recognition of threats to stability, democracy and sustainable development as well as the threats posed by such factors as environmental degradation, overpopulation, involuntary population movements and organized international crime.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade (DFAIT) will establish a senior-level office for global issues, reporting to an assistant deputy minister. This office will be designed specifically to help bring greater coherence to the Government's capacity for addressing internationally such issues as 
the global environment, population growth, international migration (including refugee issues), international crime, human rights, democratization, preventive diplomacy and post-conflict peace building.
The Government will encourage the relevant Standing Committees of Parliament to address effectively the entire spectrum of security issues.
*2.2 The Committee believes that steps should be taken without delay to enlarge the Security Council to make it more representative, 
and that the Council should adopt more transparent methods of work that would facilitate communication between Council members and countries that are not on the Council but have specific interests or concerns to express.
Response The Government agrees with and has given vigorous support to reform of the Security Council so that it functions with optimum cohesion, effectiveness and credibility.
A number of improvements have already been made and the Council is operating more effectively today than in most earlier periods.
However, more can be done to improve existing procedures without enlarging the Security Council, a step that would require reform of the Charter of the United Nations (UN).
In particular, Canada is working with other like-minded member states to ensure: 
1)that there is greater consultation between Council members and those non-members who have a particular interest in issues considered by the Council; and
2)that relevant regional players participate in Council debates.
Canada has been instrumental in expanding Security Council deliberations on peacekeeping operations to include consultations on a continuing basis with countries that contribute troops.
Canada is seeking a seat on the Security Council for the 1999-2000 term in order to play an important role in guiding the UN into the next millennium.
Should Council membership reform become a viable option, the Canadian objective will be to ensure that the reform increases the opportunity for Canada to have a seat at the table.
*2.3 The Committee favours the establishment of clear and consistent criteria for UN intervention, and a closer integration of political, economic and military measures at each step of any UN peace operation, with the emphasis on prevention.
It also favours strengthening the capability of the Secretariat to provide early warning and to co-ordinate the national force contributions and other participants in peace operations.
At the same time, it would welcome the decentralization of peace operations regionally where possible, so that if the Security Council decided that intervention was necessary, it could authorize a regional organization to undertake a specific operation under UN auspices.
Response The Government agrees.
Canada is committed to reforming the UN system in a way that will permit the organization to respond more effectively to emerging threats to peace.
Until now effective UN action has been constrained.
There has been little consensus on the basis for timely intervention;
indeed, the UN has been called on to respond to diverse situations, and that diversity underscores the difficulty of identifying hard and fast criteria.
Nevertheless, the Government recognizes the need to work with our UN partners in developing workable principles that will guide UN action.
The Government set out similar considerations in the 1994 Defence White Paper.
A second problem for the UN has been that once the decision to intervene has been taken, the means for implementing UN objectives have only rarely been readily available.
Of particular concern is the need for prompt deployment of suitable forces at the outset of a mission as well as the need for adequate numbers of properly equipped forces in theatre, as the mandate of UN missions changes.
In addition, the UN continues to suffer from the lack of adequate and readily available financial resources.
The Government believes that all of these problems require prompt attention.
We are advancing proposals to provide the UN with financial resources that do not depend on contributions from member governments.
In April 1994, Canada organized a brainstorming session for senior UN officials and representatives of the major troop-contributing countries to sketch out further ways of improving the planning, preparation and conduct of UN peacekeeping operations.
As announced by the Minister of Foreign Affairs at the United Nations General Assembly in 1994, Canada is now leading a major study of options for enhancing the UN's rapid-reaction capability. The study will be tabled at the General Assembly in the fall of 1995.
The Government also agrees fully on the need for greater efforts on early warning and, especially, prevention.
The international community must be able to anticipate conflict if it is not always to be condemned to coping with its consequences.
We must find innovative ways of providing early warning and then heading off crises.
In this regard, Canada has submitted to the Secretary General a list of eminent Canadians available for preventive diplomacy missions.
The Government agrees on the important role that regional organizations can play in a security system under UN auspices.
Canada supports the efforts of the UN Secretary General in encouraging regional organizations such as the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE, formerly the CSCE), the Organization of American States (OAS) and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to accept more of the international peacekeeping burden under the rules established by the United Nations.
*2.4 The Committee believes that the primary international role of the Canadian Forces should be to support peacekeeping operations, but it recommends a more selective approach to Canadian involvement, based on an evaluation of the Canadian interests engaged and on criteria which would emphasize those capabilities and skills, both military and civilian, at which Canadians excel.
Training for UN peacekeeping operations should become a major thrust of Canadian policy.
Response The Government is committed to the active continued and effective engagement of the Canadian Forces in international peacekeeping operations.
Recent experiences show that only adequately armed and equipped peacekeeping forces, trained and prepared for combat, can successfully respond to threats, armed attacks and other dangerous situations that can arise.
The Government intends to provide the armed forces with what they require to fulfil their peacekeeping function.
The Government agrees, however, that Canada cannot be everywhere and do everything; it intends to be selective in its peacekeeping involvement.
In the Defence White Paper, the Government set out various factors that will be taken into account in considering the deployment of Canadian resources on multilateral operations to support peace and stability.
As the Committee recommends, the Canadian contribution will stress those capabilities at which we excel.
Canada will continue to contribute mine-clearing skills and other forms of expertise to assist in post-conflict peace building.
Canadian expertise will continue to be offered in the planning and preparation of peacekeeping operations and in the logistic support for them, even in circumstances when Canadian troops might not be available to participate in the peacekeeping contingent itself.
Our extensive experience in peacekeeping and related operations strongly suggests that personnel deployed on such missions require a combination of different skills.
Basic combat training is essential but it must be supplemented with knowledge of the country of operations, its people and their culture.
This combination of skills has always been required, but contemporary peacekeeping operations require personnel that have a wider and deeper base of knowledge than ever before.
That is why the Government is committing significant resources to establish the Lester B. Pearson Peacekeeping Centre at former Canadian Forces Base Cornwallis, in Nova Scotia.
The Centre will offer relevant courses to peacekeepers from all nations and will conduct research in support of international peacekeeping.
It will ensure that Canadian expertise, derived from 40 years of practical experience, will be available to future peacekeepers.
It is also clear that support for democratic structures, functioning legal systems and free media can maintain peace when social systems are under pressure.
Mediation and effective policing can do the same if normal structures give way.
Similarly there are enormous challenges for civilian intervention when peace is restored after conflict.
That is why the Government is committed to ensuring that its own resources for peace are allocated to a range of objectives, and why it is encouraging a more diversified approach to peace operations in the UN.
The participation of the RCMP in restoring peace and democracy in Haiti is a key instance of this determination, as is the role of Canadian electoral observers there, in South Africa and elsewhere.
The Government has also provided the UN with a roster of Canadian experts for civilian roles in UN operations, and it is encouraging the Cornwallis training centre to incorporate into its programs specific human rights training components for both military and civilians.
*2.5 The Committee considers that Canada should remain an active member of NATO.
At the same time, we should encourage NATO to continue moving to a collective security role for the whole of Europe, in co-operation with the Partnership for Peace participants.
In keeping with this approach, Canada should encourage a closer working relationship between NATO and the UN, and should restructure its assigned forces, in consultation with its allies, to better support NATO peacekeeping operations under UN or OSCE auspices.
It should also urge the OSCE to strengthen further those of its institutions that deal with conflict prevention and resolution, and the procedures that pertain to them, so as to enable them to take more timely and effective action.
Response The Government agrees.
Canada is committed to remaining an active member of NATO and working within the Alliance to ensure that it can meet the challenges of today and tomorrow, not those of the past.
The disappearance of the Soviet bloc removes a central preoccupation for the Alliance.
It does not, however, eliminate the value of collective defence co-operation between the countries of the Atlantic Community, particularly in a world characterized by instability and uncertainty.
Moreover, a new generation of problems threatens the security of Europe.
Ethnic and other social tensions exist in many parts of Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) and the former Soviet Union (FSU).
The process of political and economic reform is an arduous one and its outcome uncertain.
The military arsenal of the former Soviet Union is only gradually being destroyed, and the need to maintain legitimate control over it is a growing source of concern.
All these problems could have serious implications for our own security, and the Government believes that NATO can and must evolve to help address these challenges.
The Alliance has the diplomatic weight, technical expertise and military capabilities that could be applied to assist in providing a greater sense of security to all European states.
Extending the vocation of the Alliance in this manner without creating new divisions in Europe will undoubtedly be a challenge, but we must pursue every feasible opportunity.
The Government believes that if NATO is to succeed in playing this new role, we must ensure that transparency, co-operation and coherence exist between the Alliance and other European institutions, such as the OSCE and the Western European Union (WEU).
In the same vein, NATO must ensure that its role is consonant with the emergence of a broader international security regime that would be developed under the auspices of the UN.
Canada's engagement with NATO must be seen within this evolving context.
Canada has been one of the strongest proponents of the Partnership for Peace program -- a first step toward the eventual expansion of the Alliance -- as part of a foundation for a broader European collective security system that includes Russia and the other members of the FSU.
Canada also strongly supports a special dialogue on future European security structures with the Russian Federation to ensure that its security concerns are reflected in NATO's evolution.
The Government also agrees that NATO, the OSCE and the UN must develop a better capacity for working together to manage the whole spectrum of challenges to stability in Europe.
Canada strongly supports the NATO concept of Combined Joint Task Forces (CJTFs) as an effective and less expensive means of organizing Alliance defence and making NATO resources available for peacekeeping and other operations in addition to its existing mandate.
Canada will continue pressing to ensure that established NATO command, logistics, and other military and organizational assets are available to assist the UN and the OSCE in the planning, preparation and conduct of peacekeeping and other humanitarian missions.
In this context, the Government also agrees on the importance of strengthening the OSCE's capacity for resolving and preventing conflict.
At the Budapest OSCE Review Conference in December, Canada worked hard to improve the operation of the OSCE Conflict Prevention Centre.
With other countries, Canada is working actively to establish an OSCE peacekeeping capability, and it is ready to share Canadian peacekeeping expertise with the OSCE Secretariat in Vienna in order to assist in planning for a proposed OSCE peacekeeping operation in Nagorno-Karabakh.
Canada strongly supports the work of the OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities and the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR).
Canada is also calling for new areas of intervention for the OSCE, particularly including the monitoring of communications media to help prevent these from becoming propaganda instruments that contribute to instability and conflict.
*2.6 The Committee recommends that Canada be prepared to renew the NORAD agreement, but should press for a further shift of emphasis from air defence to global space surveillance.
Canada should require prior consultations on any move to abrogate the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty or to place weapons in space.
Response The Government agrees with the Committee that Canada negotiate a further renewal of the NORAD agreement, taking into account changes in the threat to North America, new technologies and future challenges.
Canada will continue to oppose abrogation or weakening of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty and the deployment of weapons in space.
Canada welcomes the decision of the US. Government to adhere to the strict interpretation of the ABM Treaty.
The Government has followed with interest the evolution of US. defence policy and strategy in recent years toward an emphasis on ground- and sea-based theatre missile defence systems.
For now, Canada is interested in gaining a better understanding of missile defence through research and in consultation with like-minded countries.
In the future, Canada's potential role in ballistic missile defence will be determined not in isolation but in conjunction with the evolution of North American and possible NATO-wide aerospace defence arrangements.
Canadian involvement in ballistic missile defence would also have to be cost-effective and affordable, make an unambiguous contribution to Canada's defence needs, and build on missions the Forces already perform, such as surveillance and communications.
Canada will continue to engage the United States in discussion of these issues, both within and outside the NORAD context.
*2.7 The Committee welcomes the efforts of Organization of American States (OAS) members to increase their co-operation on security matters within the broader UN framework.
It supports Canada's initiative to create a special OAS committee to discuss security issues.
Response The Government agrees.
The Government is deeply committed to building a new relationship with other states in this hemisphere, a relationship that underlines Canada's role as a full partner.
That commitment extends to common efforts to ensure peace in the region through the application of UN-sanctioned principles.
The OAS Special Committee on Hemispheric Security (CHS) was proposed by Canada and meets at OAS headquarters in Washington.
Canada co-sponsored and participated in an OAS experts meeting on confidence- and security-building measures;
held in Buenos Aires in March 1994, this was the first such meeting in the Western Hemisphere.
Canada looks forward to the follow-up Regional Conference to be held in Santiago later this year.
Canada is promoting a broader concept of co-operative security within the OAS, taking into account a diverse range of security challenges ranging from internal conflict and narco-terrorism to pollution and environmental degradation.
Within the CHS, Canada is working to enhance OAS co-operation with the UN.
In addition, Canada is working to build support for the development of a regional register of conventional arms transfers and military expenditures, and support for conflict prevention and resolution mechanisms.
At the initiative of Canada, the CHS is also examining the effects of the indiscriminate use of land mines in certain parts of the hemisphere.
Canada is pressing for a CHS review of the Inter-American Defence Board to improve that body's functioning, transparency and financial accountability.
Canada supports strengthening the CHS by making it a Permanent Committee of the OAS, with a regular and focused work program; this will further contribute to OAS efforts to build security, promote democratic institutions, and enhance respect for human rights and the rule of law within the hemisphere.
As a follow-up to the decisions taken at the recent Miami Summit of the Americas, the OAS will also conduct work on democratic development and good governance.
*2.8 The Committee considers that Canada should support initiatives such as the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) regional forum to develop a co-operative security dialogue in the region, with a view to working gradually toward regional security arrangements.
As a Pacific country, Canada should play an active role in these developments, should demonstrate that it has security interests to protect in the Pacific, and should provide a more visible naval presence there.
Response The Government agrees with the Committee and has taken and will continue to take measures to demonstrate our commitment to the creation of an inclusive, co-operative security dialogue in the Pacific.
Canada has been instrumental in promoting the concept of Asian-Pacific regional security dialogue. Canada has championed the development of a regional dialogue concept that became the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF).
It is pressing forward the work of ARF now that the body has been established.
Canada prepared discussion papers on non-proliferation and conflict prevention for the inaugural meeting of the Forum in the summer of 1994, and it is preparing additional expert papers on these and other issues at the request of the Forum.
Canada is also helping to organize an ARF peacekeeping workshop planned for March 1995.
As indicated in the Defence White Paper, the Government intends to maintain a visible naval presence in the Pacific.
HMCS Vancouver visited Japan and the Republic of Korea in 1994, and Canada is planning to send two ships to the ASEAN region in the summer of 1995.
*2.9 It is the Committee's view that Canada should do everything possible, in co-operation with like-minded countries, to expand adherence to the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and to reinforce the NPT regime, to support indefinite extension of the Treaty, to press for further major reductions in the arsenals of the nuclear powers and to continue the campaign for a total nuclear test ban.
Canada should press for universal reporting to the UN Register of Conventional Arms, and should improve and expand the Register to include domestic procurement.
It should also advocate the prohibition of weapons sales to countries which do not report to the Register, as recommended by the Canadian Committee for the 50th Anniversary of the UN.
Special efforts should be made to control the production and the import and export of land mines.
Response The Government agrees with the Committee concerning the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Nuclear proliferation continues to be a grave threat to international security.
The NPT is the world community's instrument for containing the danger; universal adherence to its provisions is critical to our security.
However, indefinite extension is being made difficult by the perception of some states that the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) negotiations are not proceeding fast enough.
Other issues that some states have linked with their extension decision include the development of legally enforceable assurances not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons (called negative security guarantees) and an early start to negotiations on a convention to halt the production of fissile material for explosive purposes (a "cutoff" convention).
Many parties to the NPT consider that the treaty is discriminatory and that its indefinite extension would perpetuate a perceived inequality between states possessing nuclear arms and those without such weapons.
The NPT regime will therefore face difficult challenges in the future even as the Treaty's importance grows in a world moving away from the control of nuclear superpowers.
Canada will continue to do everything possible to encourage universal adherence to and indefinite extension of the NPT.
Canada is actively engaged with both nuclear weapons states and non-weapons states to build consensus for an indefinite extension of the Treaty.
We are preparing for joint efforts with like-minded states, such as South Africa and Japan, to encourage moderate and pragmatic consideration of the NPT question.
Canada's special relationship with Ukraine supported the successful international efforts to convince that country to accede to the NPT.
We are working hard to achieve a lasting and verifiable comprehensive nuclear test ban, and are leading international efforts to begin negotiations on a cutoff of the production of fissile material for weapons purposes; for example, Canada hosted an international cutoff seminar in January 1995.
The Government also agrees on the danger posed by the proliferation of conventional arms, and is currently studying ways in which this issue can be addressed effectively by the international community.
Canada was one of the first to advocate the UN Arms Register, and strongly supports it.
We continue to report domestic military production.
In 1994 we led the fight to include domestic production and to make additional improvements to the Register.
Canada will continue to encourage universal voluntary reporting to the Register; we believe that, over time, the success of the Register as a confidence-building measure will encourage wider participation.
In pursuing multilateral efforts to ensure universal adherence, Canada will keep under review the effectiveness of advocating the prohibition of arms exports to non-reporting states and other efforts to force reluctant states to provide information to the Register.
The Government agrees on the importance of controlling the spread and use of land mines.
Canada has not exported any antipersonnel land mines since 1987, and is working to strengthen the UN Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW), particularly Protocol II on the use of land mines, in preparation for the Review Conference in October 1995.
Canada is studying ways of broadening the scope of the CCW to cover internal conflicts (where most antipersonnel land mines are used) and to provide a verification regime that would further enhance the effectiveness of the Convention.
Canada is also working with other interested countries to establish additional effective international controls on the transfer and use of land mines.
*2.10 The Committee believes that Canada's continued contribution to international security is essential, both for Canada's interest and for Canada's reputation as a respected member of the international community.
The Committee recommends that consideration be given to a more specialized configuration for the Canadian Forces, to better support peacekeeping operations.
The Committee cautions, however, against undue fine-tuning of Canadian Forces capabilities.
Response The Government agrees with the Committee that Canada can and must continue to contribute to international security in a manner commensurate with our stature and resources.
As outlined in the Defence White Paper, the Government is committed to increasing the number of Canadian Forces personnel available for international peacekeeping operations.
Beyond this, to help ensure that all available expertise is fully used, the Government is helping to establish an international peacekeeping training centre at Cornwallis, Nova Scotia.
At the same time, the Government is convinced that only multi-purpose combat-capable forces can form the solid base necessary for successful peacekeeping, and it will guard against undue fine-tuning of Canadian Forces capabilities, as the Committee advises.
Chapter 3: Building Shared Prosperity
*3.1 The Committee recommends that the federal government, in consultation with the provinces, and taking their views into account, seek an efficient way to devolve some responsibilities for trade promotion to a more arm's-length
and preferably joint public-private consortium, which would offer businesses, particularly small and medium-sized enterprises, access to real-time market intelligence and marketing strategies.
Such a body should give special attention to the difficulty of opening new markets; more funds should be allocated when the market is distant and when it requires the knowledge of difficult foreign languages or unfamiliar societies.
User fees might be charged on the basis of ability to pay.
While traditional markets should be maintained, greater efforts should be deployed to seek out new markets aggressively.
Response The Government agrees with the need to further the involvement of the provinces and the private sector in Canadian international business development, to provide business with access to real-time market intelligence and marketing strategies, and to shift resources to emerging markets.
In keeping with these objectives, the Government intends to: 
-pursue efforts to rationalize international business development activities via the "Trade Team Canada" approach, which would seek to increase synergy and reduce duplication among different jurisdictions and private-sector institutions;
-merge DFAIT's business development programs to focus on small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and to provide more flexibility for shifting resources to emerging and challenging markets
(as a first step, some of Canada's international business development resources have already been shifted to emerging markets such as Asia and Latin America, and additional re-allocation of resources is planned); 
-ensure greater provincial and private-sector involvement in the development and priority setting of the annual International Trade Business Plan (ITBP);
-convert the ITBP into a strategic, resource-allocating tool; 
-provide training for Trade Commissioners in improved techniques of market intelligence and information gathering and delivery, along with other professional courses to improve standards of client service; 
and -provide more client access to and departmental use of technology;
for example, an electronic bulletin board has been developed by DFAIT and representatives from the private sector.
The Government has carefully reviewed the proposal to establish an arm's-length agency for pursuing Canada's international business development aims.
It agrees that its approach to business development must be as sensitive as possible to market demands.
It will continue to ensure that all possibilities for private-sector involvement in the effort are actively pursued.
It intends, however, to maintain the present structure in view of the valuable trade-political links stemming from the Trade Commissioner Service's integration within the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade,
the increasing convergence of trade policy and international business development activities,
and the importance of having a strong commercial/economic influence on Canada's foreign policy.
The Government believes that a fee for service should not be implemented at this time as it might act as a disincentive to first-time exporters.
The Government is, however, examining other avenues for greater cost recovery and cost sharing with the private sector.
*3.2To strengthen Canada's position in the North American context, the Committee recommends that: 
*3.2A Canada should insist that the trilateral dispute-settlement process be fairly applied, and should continue to push aggressively for the successful completion of the negotiations on subsidies and antidumping codes in NAFTA by 1996, as originally foreseen, with the aim of adopting common rules to replace the current trade remedy laws of the NAFTA members;
*3.2B if these negotiations are unsuccessful, the Canadian Government should review its options.
Response The Government will ensure that the trilateral dispute-settlement process embodied in Chapter Twenty of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) is applied fairly.
This dispute settlement process represents a significant improvement over the earlier Canada-US. Free Trade Agreement (FTA) procedures.
A consensus roster, the reverse panel selection process, scientific review boards and controls over excessive retaliation provide effective means for enforcing the rules of the agreement.
The Government will also undertake to ensure that any improvements to the dispute settlement process are incorporated into future negotiations on Chilean accession to the NAFTA and into negotiations to meet the objective, recently set by hemispheric leaders, of establishing the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA).
The Government agrees fully with the need to establish effective subsidy and anti-dumping disciplines between the NAFTA partners.
On December 2, 1993, the Prime Minister announced that Canada, Mexico and the United States had agreed to seek solutions that reduce the possibility of disputes concerning the issues of subsidies, dumping and the operation of trade remedy laws regarding such practices.
Pursuant to the trilateral agreement, two working groups have been set up: one for subsidies/countervail and the other for anti-dumping.
The Government places a high priority on this process and will work hard for progress by December 1995 in reducing the possibility of disputes with the United States, and for sustained steady movement toward comprehensive reform thereafter.
*3.2 To strengthen Canada's position in the North American context, the Committee recommends that:
*3.2C the government should in addition make clear that the cultural exemption provision of NAFTA should not be interpreted in a way that may be prejudicial to the concerns of Canada's cultural communities.
Response Fundamental to Canada's sense of purpose and identity is the continuing existence of a dynamic, unique space of our own in the North American cultural environment.
Consequently, the preservation of the cultural industries exemption was a critical objective achieved by Canada during the NAFTA negotiations, as was the "grandfathering" of several existing measures of support.
NAFTA provides that any measures adopted or maintained with respect to cultural industries shall be governed exclusively in accordance with the FTA.
We retain the right to maintain existing cultural support measures or to implement new ones.
However, the FTA provides that the United States can retaliate with measures of "equivalent commercial effect" if Canada takes actions that would have been inconsistent with FTA obligations were it not for the cultural exemption clause.
In practice, this provision provides scope for supporting cultural industries by implementing measures that not only are consistent with Canada's international obligations but also do not trigger the right under the exemption to take countermeasures.
It is important that domestic and international policies regarding the full range of Canadian interests be balanced, complementary and mutually reinforcing.
Many Canadian companies compete successfully with US.-based and other foreign cultural businesses in domestic and international markets.
The strong trend toward business alliances and co-productions has also helped Canadian firms.
The Government must therefore balance all these considerations in choosing the appropriate policy instruments for protecting and promoting Canadian culture.
The Government is committed to the development and continued growth of Canada's cultural industries.
The Government has already introduced a number of innovative measures that highlight its commitment to a dynamic cultural industries sector.
*3.2 To strengthen Canada's position in the North American context, the Committee recommends that:
*3.2D the government should also seek wider support in multilateral forums for generally accepted codes which would establish a better and fairer common law of trade in these areas.
Response The Government agrees.
Multilaterally, Canada has been one of the most active participants in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and the creation of the World Trade Organization (WTO) has been a priority for the Government.
The Government intends to continue to pursue the development of comprehensive and precise rules regarding subsidies, dumping, and anti-dumping and countervailing duty procedures, and it will continue to take initiatives to ensure greater commonality and fairness in the trade remedy field.
International rule-making in this area will not come easily: entrenched special interest groups in major markets have been using trade remedies as their protectionist instrument of choice, and trade remedy practices have spread to many developing countries in recent years.
The Government is addressing this challenge by implementing a multi-faceted strategy that emphasizes greater and wider coalition-building multilaterally between reform-minded countries, and intensified effort in the NAFTA context.
This work at different levels and in different forums is naturally reinforcing and strengthens the rules-based multilateral system, which remains the bedrock of Canadian trade policy.
As regards culture, Canadian interests are fully protected through exemptions for cultural industries negotiated in the FTA, NAFTA and the GATT/WTO.
*3.3 To enhance Canada's long-term trading position globally, the Committee recommends that: 
*3.3A the government should reaffirm the principle of a rules-based multilateral system as the preferred option for Canadian trade policy, 
should ensure that existing bilateral and regional trading arrangements are complementary to multilateral objectives, and should carefully consider the implications for present and future multilateral trading arrangements of entering into any new bilateral or regional negotiations.
Response The Government agrees and strongly reaffirms that a rules-based multilateral system is the preferred option for Canadian trade policy.
The Government has adopted Bill C-57 (An Act to Implement the Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization), which reaffirms that such a system remains the cornerstone of Canadian trade policy.
The Government will also continue to ensure that Canada's bilateral and regional trading arrangements are complementary to our multilateral objectives.
The GATT and the WTO establish an internationally agreed set of rules and procedures for the conduct of international trade.
The NAFTA is fully consistent with GATT requirements for free trade, and further elaborates and adapts rules and procedures for the particular circumstances of our largest and most important trading relationship.
The NAFTA complements our multilateral objectives by not raising barriers to other countries and by lowering barriers to trade in a number of areas not addressed by the GATT.
The Government believes that bilateral and regional arrangements can provide opportunities for addressing issues on which agreement has not yet been reached in multilateral forums.
It is convinced that progress made in bilateral and regional agreements tends to stimulate further trade liberalization multilaterally.
We have built bridges within North America through the FTA and the NAFTA.
The Government is now building hemispheric links, starting with Chile's accession to the NAFTA and the initiation of work on establishing a Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA).
The Government is also exploring strengthened trade and economic ties with the Pacific Rim and the European Union (EU).
Opportunities in the Asia-Pacific region are being pursued vigorously,
and reflecting this commitment is the recent Jakarta Declaration, issued by the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation forum (APEC), to eliminate trade and investment barriers in the region within 25 years.
Similarly, the Communiqué issued at the conclusion of the Summit of the Americas demonstrates Canada's commitment, shared with other countries in the hemisphere, to pursue liberalization of trade and investment throughout Latin America and the Caribbean.
*3.3 To enhance Canada's long-term trading position globally, the Committee recommends that: 
*3.3B Canada should work with others to ensure that the new World Trade Organization (WTO) operates in a way that is genuinely universal and multilateral, with the widest possible membership consistent with generally accepted standards.
Response The Government agrees and will continue to work to ensure that the WTO will operate in a way that is genuinely universal and multilateral, with the widest possible membership consistent with generally accepted standards.
The Uruguay Round negotiations, carried out over seven and a half years, involved more than 100 different participants from around the globe.
In all, 125 have now signed the resulting WTO Agreement and 81 ratified the Agreement by January 1, 1995 (including Canada), thereby becoming original members.
It is expected that the remaining parties will carry out their ratification procedures during a transition period.
Moreover, Canada and other interested parties are working hard to enable key economies such as China, Taiwan and the Russian Federation, as well as some 20 others including Ukraine, to join the GATT/WTO as full members of the multilateral trading system.
These economies will be subject to the same full range of rights and obligations as current members.
*3.3 To enhance Canada's long-term trading position globally, the Committee recommends that:
*3.3C Canada should urge that the WTO give early attention to such items as agricultural export subsidies, the environment and labour standards, 
and above all the general question of trade remedies, and the particular question of the worrisome proliferation of antidumping actions.
Response The Government agrees that the WTO should give early priority to trade remedies and agricultural export subsidies.
The Government strongly advocates increased international disciplines on the use of agricultural export subsidies, and has been pursuing initiatives intended to lead to a global ban on their use.
Through the WTO, Canada will seek the support of all countries in working toward this goal.
The relationship between the environment and the trading system has already been the focus of discussion within the GATT, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and other organizations.
Canada and its WTO trading partners agreed to create a WTO Committee on Trade and Environment to examine these issues further and to make recommendations as to whether modifications to multilateral trade rules are required.
With Canada's support, the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the OECD have embarked on an examination of the relationship between internationally recognized labour standards and the multilateral trading system.
Given the complex and potentially divisive nature of the issues, the work in these forums will be developed further to ensure that it is introduced effectively in the WTO.
Canada is committed to ensuring that the WTO is able to control the growing recourse to trade remedy measures, including anti-dumping action.
This is particularly important because in absolute terms and on a year-to-year basis, more anti-dumping investigations have been initiated.
The rise is due to an increase in the number of countries that have enacted trade remedy laws, rather than greater resort to this form of protection by traditional users.
The Government's approach to the United States and the EU on trade remedies will continue to seek the primacy of law over unilateral action by encouraging adherence to an agreed set of rules and procedures for the conduct of trade that is improved over time.
*3.3 To enhance Canada's long-term trading position globally, the Committee recommends that:
*3.3D Canada should take advantage of opportunities in all forums to pursue the principle of broader rules-based trade liberalization.
*3.8 The Committee recommends that the government, in preparing its approach to the question of reform of the Bretton Woods system in the run-up to the Halifax summit of the G-7, should develop a strategy, involving the World Trade Organization and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) as well as the international financial institutions, designed to maintain a proactive Canadian role in working toward a rules-based global economy.
This strategy should be tabled in Parliament and considered by the appropriate standing committees.
Response The Government will continue to pursue the principle of broader rules-based trade liberalization in all forums in which Canada participates and which provide us with essential leverage, including the NAFTA, APEC, the OECD, the Group of Seven leading industrialized nations (G-7) and the Quadrilateral Trade Ministers Conference.
In this regard, the June 1995 G-7 Economic Summit in Halifax, along with work undertaken by the Quadrilateral Trade Ministers before the Summit, provides an important opportunity to pursue further rules-based trade and investment liberalization.
At the Halifax Summit, Canada will seek agreement that the key trading powers commit themselves to early consolidation of the WTO system and to accelerating the preparatory work required to identify the key future issues.
In the preparations for and during the Halifax Summit, Canada will also seek to co-ordinate activities and enhance co-operation between the major industrialized economies, with the aim of equipping the Bretton Woods system to meet the challenges of the 21st century.
Setting "rules of the game" and building a rules-based global economy are crucial to Canada and integral parts of the reform process.
Ministers will brief members of the appropriate Standing Committees on prospects for the Halifax Summit, and will seek their views at an appropriate date.
*3.4 Given Canada's involvement in regional trade, the Committee recommends that Canada should follow a two-track policy of supporting the expansion of NAFTA through the accession of new members,
and at the same time strengthening its political and economic presence in Latin America and developing trade relations with Mexico and with other selected trading partners.
Response The Government agrees.
The Prime Minister's recent visit to Latin America, accompanied by the Minister for International Trade and the Secretary of State (Latin America and Africa), underscores Canada's commitment to building closer relations with the region.
Canada fully supports expanding NAFTA to countries or groups of countries willing and able to accept its obligations.
As a result, at the conclusion of the Summit of the Americas, Canada, the United States and Mexico announced the start of preparatory talks with Chile with a view to commencing accession negotiations in 1995.
Moreover, over time Canada seeks to extend NAFTA membership to include other hemispheric partners and will soon engage in preliminary discussions with other countries in this regard.
NAFTA expansion, however, will be only one dimension of intensified relations with the region.
Canada's involvement with the states of the region continues to be cemented through our active participation in the Organization of American States (OAS) -- in areas as diverse as human rights, democratic development, regional security, technical co-operation, narcotics control and, more recently, environmental issues.
On many of these issues Canada is consistently looked to for leadership in the OAS, and is often considered a counterbalance in the equation between the United States and the rest of the region.
In addition, our closer contacts with the countries of the hemisphere on a variety of foreign policy issues have facilitated valuable strategic alliances in other international forums, including the United Nations.
Other important institutional and economic ties with Latin America include Canadian membership in the Inter-American Development Bank, Foreign Investment Protection Agreements (FIPAs) with Argentina and Uruguay, and Double Taxation Agreements (DTAs) with Brazil, Argentina and several Caribbean countries.
*3.5 We recommend that the government pursue trade opportunities actively in the Asia-Pacific region.
Success will depend upon Canada's ability to achieve greater market access and to develop initiatives that result in the greatest comparative advantage to Canadian exporters.
Response The Government agrees.
The Prime Minister's recent visit to several countries of the region, accompanied by the Minister for International Trade and the Secretary of State (Asia-Pacific), underscores Canada's commitment to building closer relations with the region.
We will pursue trade and investment liberalization in the Pacific, mindful of our key market access concerns and of the need for full consistency with GATT/WTO agreements.
Canada was a founding member of APEC and actively supported APEC's call for free trade in the region by the year 2020.
APEC is a forum for accelerated progress on Uruguay Round market access commitments and a workshop on specific "new" areas (e.g., standards, customs practices, trade/environment).
At the same time, Canada is prepared to launch concerted, high-level bilateral approaches to resolve long-standing and severe trade irritants with selected partners, as a supplement to global and APEC approaches.
We will reappraise our Asia-Pacific business development programming with priorities assigned as follows:
-building on the "Trade Team Canada" concept, as best seen recently in China, to engage provincial governments and business associations in projecting more effectively Canada's capacity and willingness to do business in the region; 
-encouraging a stronger and more visible Canadian business presence in Asia-Pacific markets;
-targeting fairs and commercial missions activity with a view to concentration on sectors/countries of highest potential for Canadian exporters;
-devising programs that respond to the circumstances and the attributes of Canadian SMEs;
-revitalizing the investment dimension of our business development effort to focus on its role in trade, technology and industry in Canada, and on the potential for third-country co-operation; 
and -working in close association with the business community in Canada to ensure that our efforts reflect the best possible sense of where our competitive advantage lies.
We will devise a commercially attractive and cost-effective approach to technology acquisition as well as a coherent science and technology strategy for Asia-Pacific -- one suitably reflective of national R&D and industrial development priorities, and co-ordinated with existing programs.
This will associate our private, public and research communities with the dynamics of innovation and scientific development in Asia-Pacific.
It will thereby help strengthen our industrial base, our research capabilities, and trade and investment prospects.
We will encourage an expanded and co-ordinated effort in specific sectors.
We will aggressively seek to preserve market shares of traditional agricultural and resource products.
In value-added sectors we will concentrate on tourism, energy, environment, infrastructure, informatics, building materials, processed food and consumer products, and education/training services.
These are Canadian sectors of excellence, and Asian markets for them can spur industrial growth and job creation in Canada.
We will also seek adjustment in related and supporting policies and programs in such areas as
air transport, visas and export finance, with the aim of reinforcing promotional efforts.
*3.6 The Committee recommends that the government develop, as part of an overall integrated trade strategy, a long-term plan for creating and promoting an international orientation for business in Canada, in co-operation with interested provincial governments.
Academic and cultural institutions as well as the business community should also be involved in this strategy.
We further recommend that the government seek a shared commitment with the provinces on a plan to create exchanges, scholarships and other programs designed to develop a new class of outward-looking Canadian entrepreneurs.
Response The international business environment is passing through a period of accelerating change.
This new environment is typified by:
the liberalization of trade and investment rules domestically and through international instruments (e.g., the WTO, the NAFTA);
the emergence of many new competitors for market share and quality investments;
the significantly increased mobility of investment capital;
and the accelerated pace of technological change, which both facilitates these other changes and is sustained in part by them.
The new environment puts a premium on adaptable human resources equipped with a global, dynamic vision of markets.
The Government supports the Committee's recommendation. With the provinces, it will explore new ways of building upon existing programs to develop a more international orientation for business education in Canada.
The Canadian Foreign Service Institute (CFSI) will play its part.
It is now mandated to upgrade the skills of employees of the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade.
CFSI provides regular training in a wide spectrum of international subjects including trade promotion, trade policy and foreign languages.
As part of the Institute's next five-year business plan, it will broaden its programs to include other federal government departments, provincial governments and the private sector.
The Forum for International Trade Training (FITT) provides international business skills training to the business community across Canada.
FITT will continue to grow and change to meet the educational needs of the international business community.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade has established centres for international business studies in the business faculties of eight Canadian universities.
The centres provide educational services for a growing number of students, and educational and consulting services for Canadian business.
They also encourage practical research to support these educational programs, with the aim of furthering international business development.
*3.7 The Committee, in agreement with the strongly-expressed values of Canadians, recommends that the Government of Canada should use whatever channels may be most effective to protest abuses of human rights, labour standards and/or environmental protection, whenever they occur, and should work closely wherever practical with other partners to bring about an amelioration of these situations in a manner compatible with the orderly evolution of a rules-based multilateral trading system.
The use of trade sanctions in a multilateral context should be considered in appropriate circumstances.
Response Human rights have been and remain a priority area of concern and action for Canadians.
From the drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to that of the recently concluded Convention on the Rights of the Child, Canada has been in the vanguard of those fighting to uphold human freedoms and dignity.
(See the response to recommendation 5.11 for a more complete statement on human rights).
International respect for labour standards is important in and of itself but also because it helps promote the economic security of Canadians.
Principal Canadian objectives with respect to labour are to develop a deeper understanding of the relationships between labour standards and international trade through work in the OECD and the ILO, and to involve organized labour, industry and the provinces in the development of a comprehensive Canadian position on the issue.
With respect to environmental protection, work under way at the OECD, the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), as well as with Canadian stakeholders, is directed at the strengthening of international standards and compliance mechanisms.
Canada and its WTO trading partners have also agreed to create a WTO committee on trade and the environment to make recommendations on the linkages between the two issues.
Punitive action in isolation from other countries, however, often presents the least effective means of achieving results and, in the case of trade, may hurt Canada more than it will change the behaviour of offending governments.
Multilateral action, based on international standards and procedures, affords both legitimacy and increased leverage.
In this connection, it is only very rarely the case that promoting human rights and pursuing trade are mutually exclusive objectives.
Indeed, trade and growing economic prosperity often nurture a more open society.
Experience points to the effectiveness of exposing closed countries to the international community and its values as a way of increasing pressure for the respect of human rights.
Nevertheless, in extreme cases and where deemed effective, multilaterally agreed trade sanctions may play a role in applying pressure to change egregious behaviour, as was the case in South Africa.
Canada is prepared to work actively on building consensus for multilateral approaches.
In addition, trade in sensitive goods, such as military exports, must not be allowed to bolster repression.
Canadian leadership in this area is demonstrated by our controls on the export of military goods;these are among the most restrictive of Western countries.
The controls deny export permits, among other reasons, if the goods are destined for a country where they may be used to abuse human rights or where there are actual or imminent hostilities.
To succeed, specific proposals to link labour and environmental standards to the trading system must have widespread international support.
Unilateral trade-based actions against countries on environmental or labour grounds would violate existing multilateral trading rules;
they would put at risk our key objectives of improving international compliance and strengthening the rules-based multilateral system;
and they would open Canada to the unilateral actions of others, thereby jeopardizing our prosperity and our ability to sustain standards appropriate to Canadian circumstances.
*3.9 The Committee recommends further that any review of the operations of the international financial institutions should be comprehensive and should include the question of a clear division of labour between the World Bank and the Fund, as well as their relations with other institutions such as the regional development banks.
The review should focus particular attention on making their operations more efficient, transparent, accountable and responsive to issues of human rights, social equity, environmental sustainability and public input.
To strengthen this process for Canadians, the Committee recommends that the responsible Canadian ministers as well as Canada's executive directors of the Bank and the Fund and the regional development banks be invited to appear once a year before the parliamentary committees on foreign affairs and finance to report on the activities of these institutions.
Response The Government agrees with the recommendation that the review of the operations of international financial institutions (IFIs) must include all relevant aspects of governance and portfolio management.
The IFIs face major challenges including:
the need to facilitate adjustment to rapidly increasing trade, investment and technology flows across national boundaries; 
the emergence of a more competitive marketplace in which many developing countries are participating more effectively;
concerns about exchange rate volatility and the adequacy of rules governing international currency and other transactions;
and the revolutionary shift away from state-run command economies in much of the former communist world.
The IFIs are among the key instruments at our disposal for ensuring that this great transformation takes places effectively.
Moreover, Canada has been in the forefront of efforts at the World Bank to improve portfolio quality and to make the Bank's operations more efficient, transparent, responsive and accountable to member governments, the public and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
This leadership will extend to international financial institutions and various aid donor groups, where Canada will emphasize the need to consider a recipient's human rights and good governance commitment.
In all of the multilateral development banks, we will continue to urge that priority be placed on the environment, poverty alleviation and good governance.
The banks are slowly responding but much remains to be done.
All the banks have developed and implemented environmental assessment guidelines.
We will continue to press actively for application of these policy priorities.
The Government will make available to Parliamentary Committees briefings by Ministers and officials.
The Minister of Finance submits annual reports to Parliament on the operations of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
The Minister of Foreign Affairs intends to submit annual reports on the other multilateral development banks of which Canada is a member.
*3.10 While Canada has already responded with some positive debt relief measures, the Committee concludes that consideration should be given to further measures, bilateral and multilateral, to alleviate the continuing debt crisis of the poorest countries, notably in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Such measures should not, however, be at the expense of funds for long-term development aid.
Response The Government agrees with the thrust of the recommendation.
Within the G-7 and the Paris Club (the forum dealing with official bilateral debt -- e.g., amounts owing to the Canadian International Development Agency, the Export Development Corporation and the Canadian Wheat Board), 
Canada has long pushed for greater levels of debt relief for severely indebted low-income countries (SILICs), which include, notably, many countries in sub-Saharan Africa.
The Paris Club recently reached agreement on an improved approach. This allows for debt forgiveness for these poorest countries of as much as 67 per cent (up from 50 per cent); and for the first time it includes forgiveness on the whole stock of debt of eligible countries, determined on a case-by-case basis.
The new approach is part of efforts to implement policies that will bring long-term economic viability.
Canada's participation in multilateral debt relief initiatives, such as Paris Club operations, is covered by allowances for general contingencies, set up in 1990.
Accordingly, these initiatives are not undertaken at the expense of Official Development Assistance (ODA).
The World Bank is examining the issue of the growing debt owed by the poorest countries to multilateral institutions.
Canada will press for innovative ways of assisting the SILICs to manage this component of their debt burden.
Canadian bilateral ODA is provided on a grant-only basis.
Canada continues encouraging other countries to forgive or convert ODA debt, and to provide new ODA resources on a grant or near-grant basis only.
Chapter 4: Sharing Sustainable Development
*4.1 The Committee is convinced that sustainable development is of key importance as an overarching foreign policy theme.
Response The Government agrees.
Canada will continue to strengthen the capacity of its Canadian and international partners to address the linkages between environmental sustainability and social development.
To be implemented effectively, sustainable development must fully integrate environmental, economic and social (including political-cultural) considerations.
In addressing any specific issue -- either domestic or, as appropriate, in international institutions or agreements -- each of these elements of sustainable development must be considered in a balanced manner.
The incorporation of sustainable development into Canadian foreign policy stems from a recognition that basic national and global interests are at stake.
The effects of unsustainable practices can be seen in Canada -- for example, in the collapse of the East Coast fisheries -- and in other parts of the world.
Responding to the challenge of sustainable development is often possible only in concert with other nations.
Canada alone cannot stop the concentration of airborne pollutants in its Arctic;
it cannot single-handedly battle the effects of acid rain on its lakes and forests; and it needs a stable and equitable trading system to pursue opportunities for economic growth.
Similarly, Canada is affected by poverty, environmental degradation, population growth and migration in the developing world 
-- for example, through increased pressure for development assistance, refugee flows or diminished opportunities for trade.
A principal thrust of Canada's international sustainable development agenda aims at developing a global framework of legally binding rules and standards as well as voluntary standards, as appropriate, to guide sustainable development.
The components of that framework are sectoral or functional -- e.g., forests, marine resources, climate change and trade -- with the rules for each recognizing the links of one to the other through co-ordinated institutional approaches.
Some components are already in force in the form of international environmental conventions;
others, such as the NAFTA or the Uruguay Round agreements, incorporate environmental considerations into trade agreements.
A new Convention on Desertification has been negotiated and signed, and Canada is preparing for its effective implementation once it enters into force.
There nevertheless remain gaps, notably in the area of forests and fisheries, and these are areas of priority for the immediate future.
This is a broad and challenging agenda, and the time frame for completing a co-ordinated framework must be measured in years if not decades.
Environmental assessment of Canadian policies, programs and projects remains a key tool in promoting sustainable development internationally.
Under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, environmental assessments will be conducted of new Canadian foreign policy, development assistance and international trade policy initiatives; in addition, the environmental effects of Official Development Assistance (ODA) projects financed by Canada will be assessed for economic, health, social and biophysical impacts.
Canada's ODA program is a key instrument for supporting sustainable development in developing countries.
It contributes directly to bilateral and NGO initiatives that address sustainable development.
It supports the Global Environment Facility, a mechanism that helps developing countries tackle global environmental issues.
And it has played an active role in strengthening the capacity and commitment of multilateral institutions, including the international financial institutions and specialized agencies, to pay greater attention to the social and ecological dimensions of development.
At Rio, Canada promised to honour and implement the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), known as the Earth Summit.
The Government understands the global imperative for long-term change in all spheres of activity to safeguard the interests of generations to come, and is committed to action both at home and in concert with other nations.
*4.2 The Committee believes that we need to maintain a proactive approach to sustainable development in our foreign policy.
We recommend the following items be included on the foreign policy agenda:
*4.2A to strengthen the capacity of bilateral, regional and multilateral institutions to address sustainable development, and to make these institutions more efficient and accountable.
Response The Government agrees.
Canada is working closely with a wide range of international and regional institutions to implement sustainable development;
these include the United Nations, the World Bank, the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation forum (APEC), the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the Organization of American States (OAS), and the newly established North American Agreement on Environmental Co-operation (NAAEC).
Most multilateral development banks have also become more active, through lending programs and operations, in advocating and supporting sustainable development.
Canada pursues this goal as well in the context of its participation in the G-7.
Moreover, Canada is supporting a number of programs and projects in developing countries - mainly through the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) and the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) -- with the objective of strengthening institutional capacities to meet sustainable development goals.
*4.2The Committee believes that we need to maintain a proactive approach to sustainable development in our foreign policy.
We recommend the following items be included on the foreign policy agenda:
*4.2B to strengthen the linkage between trade and sustainable development through the World Trade Organization.
We are confident that clear international standards and accepted rules can make a significant contribution to sustainable development while minimizing the current tendency to use the environment as an excuse to erect protectionist trade barriers.
The International Institute for Sustainable Development has produced a useful set of principles to guide further work in this area.
Response The Government agrees.
The overarching objective of trade and environment discussions is to ensure that trade and environmental policies in all countries support the objective of sustainable development.
More specifically, the goal is to ensure that trade policies do not contribute to environmental degradation or restrict legitimate environmental action, and that environmental policies do not unnecessarily restrict our trading opportunities.
The International Institute for Sustainable Development's Trade and Sustainable Development Principles could be a useful foundation for these important discussions.
The focus of the Government's efforts to address trade and environmental concerns through the development of trade rules is and will continue to be the WTO's newly created Committee on Trade and the Environment.
The mandate of this Committee includes making recommendations on whether modifications to the provisions of the multilateral trading system are required to enhance the positive interaction between trade and environmental policies and to ensure that environmental programs will not be developed for protectionist purposes.
This analysis will, among other things, contribute to a better understanding of the issues involved.
In addition to the work of the WTO, many trade and environmental issues will need to be resolved through improved and expanded international co-operation, and through international standards-setting.
The Government will pursue this in organizations such as UNEP, UNCTAD, the OECD, and the ISO.
*4.2 The Committee believes that we need to maintain a proactive approach to sustainable development in our foreign policy.
We recommend the following items be included on the foreign policy agenda:
*4.2C to foster mechanisms to ensure the close co-ordination of domestic and international policies on sustainable development, including the development of action-oriented consultative mechanisms with stakeholders.
Response The Government agrees and is working with a broad range of federal, provincial and non-government bodies through a consultative group on the UN Commission on Sustainable Development, as well as with other sector-specific consultative bodies, to develop policy recommendations related to issues such as forests, biodiversity, agriculture, human settlements and climate change.
Canada produces an annual report for the Commission on Sustainable Development, a document that integrates information related to all issues covered by Agenda 21 and other recommendations arising from UNCED.
Other mechanisms will be set up as required to deal with specific issues.
For example, in May 1994 the Government created a Task Force of the International Trade Advisory Committee to provide advice on trade and environmental issues.
In the context of international assistance, for many years CIDA has been engaged in broad-based consultations with Canadian stakeholders on the Agency's policies and programs.
Specifically, in the field of the environment CIDA has annual consultations with Canadian environmental NGOs and the private sector, including the Canadian Exporters Association.
The Government will continue to seek a close working relationship with other levels of government as well as with stakeholders such as business, non-government organizations and specialized institutions across Canada.
As part of a federal-provincial initiative to harmonize environmental management in Canada, discussions are currently under way to develop processes and mechanisms that would better involve provinces in the preparation, negotiation and implementation of new international environmental agreements.
Where possible, representatives from groups other than government will also continue to participate in special meetings, workshops and delegations to international gatherings.
The latter have included the sessions of the Commission on Sustainable Development; meetings of the Intergovernmental Working Group on Forests (IWGF), sponsored by Canada and Malaysia; and the negotiation of the conventions on climate change, biodiversity and desertification.
Such consultations will help to ensure coherence between Canada's domestic and international policies -- something that the Government views as a requirement for sustainable development.
*4.2 The Committee believes that we need to maintain a proactive approach to sustainable development in our foreign policy.
We recommend the following items be included on the foreign policy agenda:
*4.2D to accord priority status to the implementation of the environmental industries strategy.
Response The Government agrees that implementing the Environmental Industries Strategy should be a priority.
Approved in October 1994, the Strategy seeks to increase the industry's growth rate and exports while also responding to government objectives of a clean environment and a strong, internationally competitive economy.
It will be implemented over four fiscal years and its programs will fall into three areas:
supporting Canadian industry, funding new initiatives to develop and commercialize innovative environmental technologies, and improving access to domestic and global market opportunities for environmental companies.
The principal departments/agencies involved in implementing the strategy are Environment, Industry, Natural Resources, Foreign Affairs and International Trade, and CIDA.
An Environmental Industries Sector Advisory Group for International Trade is being established.
Specific programs for training trade officers in market applications of environmental technologies are being put into place as are programs to improve delivery of foreign market intelligence and information.
To accelerate dissemination of these market opportunities, the Environmental Industries Sector Expert Group is being strengthened.
In addition, various directories and databases on Canadian environmental products and services are being updated.
*4.2 The Committee believes that we need to maintain a proactive approach to sustainable development in our foreign policy.
We recommend the following items be included on the foreign policy agenda:
*4.2E to pursue the sustainable development agenda agreed at the Earth Summit in Rio, including the implementation of global environment conventions and the development of further agreements related to forestry, fisheries and the circumpolar region.
Response The Government agrees with the Committee on the need to pursue the sustainable development agenda agreed at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio.
Canada was the second industrialized nation to sign and ratify the Framework Convention on Climate Change, and the first industrialized nation to sign and ratify the Convention on Biological Diversity.
Both conventions have now come into force.
Canada participated actively in the negotiation and recent conclusion of the Convention on Desertification.
Canada is now working to ensure the effective implementation of the conventions on Climate Change and Biological Diversity; and it will do the same with respect to the more recent Convention on Desertification once it enters into force and has been ratified by Canada.
Canada also played a major role in the negotiation of the Montréal Protocol on Ozone-Depleting Substances, and continues to provide leadership in the ongoing discussion on updating and strengthening the Protocol.
Moreover, CIDA, the IDRC and the International Institute for Sustainable Development have each developed specific programs to further the aims of Agenda 21.
The Government also agrees with the Committee's recommendation to give priority, inter alia, to forests, fisheries and circumpolar co-operation.
Forests Canada has a large stake and responsibility in protecting the long-term health of its forests.
Over the past four years, in the absence of internationally agreed rules on sustainable forest management, Canada and other countries with forest product industries have faced difficulties in responding to the growing consumer pressure for forest products from sustainably managed forests.
Canada nevertheless is meeting these new challenges.
Domestically, federal and provincial governments are implementing the Guiding Principles on Forests, adopted in Rio, through initiatives such as the National Forest Strategy, the establishment of 10 "Model Forests" (working-size forests managed on sustainable principles) across the country, and provincial codes of practice.
Internationally, Canada has pursued agreement on the need for internationally recognized rules on sustainable forest management;
ideally, we would like to see these rules embodied in an International Forests Convention.
Specific efforts to build the necessary international consensus include the "Montréal Process" for developing criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in boreal and temporal forests; this was begun through a workshop organized under the auspices of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).
Through the International Partnerships Program of the Green Plan, Canada is supporting the establishment of Model Forests in Russia, Mexico and Malaysia.
With Malaysia, Canada recently sponsored the Intergovernmental Working Group on Forests (IWGF), an international experts process involving 32 governments, 10 non-governmental organizations and 5 international organizations.
The report of the IWGF sets out a wide number of options for international co-operation aimed at renewing the global forest dialogue and advancing the goal of sustainable forest management around the world; these include proposals for innovative approaches to mobilizing financial resources.
Fisheries The state of groundfish stocks in the Northwest Atlantic has continued to decline precipitously, even with the moratoriums put in place by both Canada and the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO).
The impact on over 400 Atlantic Canadian communities has been devastating.
Although the environmental factors are not well understood, it has become clear that they have played a major role in the situation.
Canada has taken drastic measures within its jurisdiction (the 200-mile Fisheries Zone) in the form of 14 moratoriums covering virtually all commercially significant groundfish stocks.
We have also implemented legislation that permits the arrest of flag-of-convenience and stateless vessels that fish the areas of the Grand Banks beyond our 200-mile zone in contravention of NAFO conservation measures.
This new legislation has been effective in achieving the withdrawal of such vessels from those fisheries.
Internationally, Canada is concentrating its efforts on gaining international agreement on rules governing the management of high-seas fisheries to include recognition of the special interests of coastal states such as Canada in straddling stocks.
These efforts have met with some success, and a draft convention was tabled for discussion at the August 1994 session of the UN Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks.
Canadian efforts over the next year will be devoted to developing a final text.
Circumpolar (see also response to recommendation 4.6)
Canada's Arctic is not only a fragile ecosystem but also a sink for airborne pollutants from as far away as the Southern Hemisphere.
The inhabitants of Canada's North (largely Aboriginal peoples) are already being affected.
Reducing threats to the Arctic environment cannot be restricted to Arctic-related initiatives.
Canada's efforts in international forums on climate change, the long-range transport of air pollutants and the dumping of low-level radioactive waste are driven in part by the dangers posed to the Arctic environment.
Canada and the seven other circumpolar nations (Denmark for Greenland, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden and the United States) have signed a Declaration on the Protection of the Arctic Environment and are implementing an Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy (AEPS).
In all AEPS meetings three Aboriginal groups participate as observers: the Inuit Circumpolar Conference, the Saami Council and the Russian Association of Peoples of the North.
Canada will host the next AEPS ministerial meeting in 1996.
Canada is also pursuing the establishment of an Arctic Council to create a forum for high-level political attention to circumpolar issues.
The recent appointment of a Circumpolar Ambassador emphasizes the Government's intention to raise Canada's profile on circumpolar issues, to consult with interested Canadians -- particularly Northern governments and Aboriginal groups -- and to provide new impetus to the Canadian Arctic agenda.
*4.2 The Committee believes that we need to maintain a proactive approach to sustainable development in our foreign policy.
We recommend the following items be included on the foreign policy agenda:
*4.2F to ensure that relevant foreign policies are assessed for their potential impact on sustainable development.
Response The Government agrees.
Sustainable development must fully integrate environmental, economic and social (including political-cultural) considerations.
In addressing any specific foreign policy issue, each of these elements of sustainable development must be considered in a balanced manner.
As regards the environmental dimension of sustainable development, DFAIT's Environmental Management Plan gives priority to environmental assessments of policy and program initiatives.
DFAIT proposals for policy and program initiatives are systematically screened for possible environmental impact.
Officials initiating a policy or program proposal for consideration by ministers are accountable for applying the Cabinet Guidelines on policy and program assessments.
In recent years the Department has completed reviews of the NAFTA (1992) and the Uruguay GATT Round (1994).
Together with DFAIT's corporate commitment to applying sustainable development considerations in day-to-day management of the Department, this experience has provided a solid basis for meeting impact assessment requirements under the new Canadian Environmental Assessment Act.
The purpose of Canada's Official Development Assistance program is to support sustainable development in developing countries.
In this regard, CIDA's Policy for Environmental Sustainability commits the Agency to assessing the environmental implications of its program and policy proposals.
DFAIT, CIDA and the Federal Environmental Assessment Review Office (FEARO) have collaborated in preparing a specific procedural regulation for the environmental assessment of projects outside Canada under the new Canadian Environmental Assessment Act.
*4.2 The Committee believes that we need to maintain a proactive approach to sustainable development in our foreign policy.
We recommend the following items be included on the foreign policy agenda:
*4.2G to address the linkages between sustainable development, poverty, democracy and governance.
Response The Government agrees.
There is a growing international consensus that sustainable development can be achieved only through an integrated approach that recognizes the fundamental linkages between the economic, environmental and social (including political-cultural) dimensions of society.
The Government will seek to address sustainable development issues in a coherent manner. As part of that effort it will examine linkages with such key questions as
migration, international organized crime, human rights and democratization, relations with developing countries (including poverty, governance and democracy), conflict prevention and post-conflict peace building.
As indicated in the response to recommendation 2.1, an office dedicated to the management of Global Issues will be created within DFAIT.
This office will work closely with many other agencies of Government such as CIDA and the departments of National Defence, Environment, Citizenship and Immigration, and Justice.
CIDA's Framework for Sustainable Development addresses the issues of environmental sustainability, human rights, democratic development, good governance and poverty alleviation.
CIDA will continue to ensure that these Canadian foreign policy concerns are considered when formulating strategic planning documents, and are integrated into the Agency's projects and programs.
*4.3 The Committee recommends that Canada ratify UNCLOS III (United Nations Convention III on the Law of the Sea) without further delay.
Response The Government agrees.
During the foreign policy debate in March, the Minister of Foreign Affairs announced that Canada would ratify the Convention soon.
The Government is reviewing domestic legislation to bring it into conformity with the provisions of the Convention, with a view to proceeding with Canadian ratification.
*4.4 The Committee recommends that Canada continue to participate actively in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization and work to strengthen its effectiveness.
Response Canada was the prime mover when NAFO was organized after the extension of national fisheries jurisdictions to 200 miles, and since then it has been an active participant in every activity of that organization.
Indeed, Canada considers that the existence of such a regional organization is essential for the proper exploitation and conservation of the fish stocks that are immediately adjacent to its own exclusive fishing zone.
Canada is determined to seek NAFO adoption of better operational and institutional mechanisms so that the organization's overall performance and usefulness are improved.
The convention now being developed by the UN Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks is expected to rely heavily on regional organizations such as NAFO for the conduct and control of high-seas fishing.
We suggest that technical co-operation in oceans management should be developed as an important activity for Canadian aid.
Response The Government shares the Committee's view that Canada can play an important role in helping developing countries to manage ocean resources.
In its revised policy framework for development co-operation, the Government has identified the environment as a priority.
Technical co-operation in oceans management will be pursued as a specific element of this priority area.
*4.6 We recommend that the government work urgently with other states to establish the Arctic Council.
One of the first priorities of the Council should be to deal with threats to the Arctic environment.
Response The Government agrees that the creation of an Arctic Council is a priority. The Arctic Council would bring together the governments of eight Arctic countries: Canada, Denmark(Greenland), Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden and the United States.
Canada envisages the Council evolving as an umbrella organization encompassing the activities of existing Arctic organizations and initiatives,
and the Government believes that the participation of Aboriginal people is essential to the Council's success.
The Arctic Council should address sustainable development in the Arctic, including economic, environmental, social and cultural issues.
The new Ambassador for Circumpolar Affairs, Mary Simon, will reinvigorate discussions and consultations with the seven other Arctic countries, as well as with northerners, with a view to establishing an Arctic Council.
Chapter 5: Reforming International Assistance
*5.1 The Committee affirms that the primary purpose of Canadian Official Development Assistance is to reduce poverty by providing effective assistance to the poorest people, in those countries that most need and can use our help.
*5.2 The Committee recommends that the Canadian aid program apply sustainable development as its basic policy framework, with a primary focus on the development of the human potential.
Response The Government agrees with the Committee's emphasis on poverty reduction and sustainable development.
We share the Committee's assessment that efforts to better define the ODA mandate should take into account the increasing diversity of developing countries.
We also agree that there is no single approach to the vital objective of poverty reduction, and that we must rely on an array of programs and policies working together in an integrated fashion.
CIDA has recently developed a policy paper on poverty reduction; this will guide programming in the six ODA priorities (see response to recommendation 5.4 for details) to help address the root causes of, and the structural factors determining, poverty.
This paper is available to the public.
The Government believes that poverty and sustainable development objectives can be combined in the following statement of purpose:
The purpose of Canada's Official Development Assistance is to support sustainable development in developing countries in order to reduce poverty and to contribute to a more secure, equitable and prosperous world.
*5.3 Compared to the current total of less than 20%, the Committee recommends that support for basic human needs should account for a minimum of 25% of ODA.
Response The Government agrees.
Support for basic human needs will become a key priority for Canada's ODA program.
Assistance will be provided for basic human needs in primary health care, basic education, family planning, nutrition, water and sanitation, and shelter.
In addition, Canada will continue to respond to emergencies with humanitarian assistance.
The Government is committed to increasing support for basic human needs, and will allocate 25 per cent of ODA to this priority.
*5.4 The Committee recommends these six program priorities for Canada's Official Development Assistance:
basic human needs; human rights, good governance and democratic development; the participation of women; environmental sustainability; private sector development; and public participation.
Response The Government agrees with the first five priorities recommended by the Committee.
Accordingly, Canadian Official Development Assistance will concentrate on: 
-basic human needs -- supporting efforts to provide primary health care, basic education, family planning, nutrition, water and sanitation, and shelter, as well as responding to emergencies with humanitarian assistance;
-women in development -- supporting the full participation of women as equal partners in the sustainable development of their societies;
-human rights, democracy and good governance -- increasing respect for human rights including children's rights, supporting democracy and responsible government, and strengthening civil society; 
-private-sector development -- promoting sustained and equitable economic growth by supporting private-sector development in developing countries;
and -the environment -- helping developing countries protect their environment and contribute to addressing global and regional environmental issues.
Public participation is indeed of key importance, but it is distinct in nature and calls for a different approach.
The Government believes that public participation is an integral part of other program priorities, and should be considered along with measures to strengthen consultation and communication.
Canada has much to offer to help developing countries deliver environmentally sound infrastructure services - for example, in rural electricity and communications -- with an emphasis on poorer groups and on building capacity.
The Government therefore believes that -infrastructure services should also be a program priority for ODA.
Infrastructure services are essential to economic growth and human development.
This is an area that corresponds well with Canadian capabilities and experience.
CIDA will ensure that detailed policies are in place for each of the six program priorities.
*5.5 The Committee recommends that Parliament adopt legislation that spells out the basic principles to guide Canadian Official Development Assistance.
*5.6 The Committee recommends that the House of Commons Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and International Trade or the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee hold regular reviews of Canadian ODA, including CIDA's performance, and that every effort be made to engage as many Canadians as possible in these reviews.
Response The Committee's report indicates that the objective of these recommendations is to ensure a clear mandate and stable goals for ODA, to strengthen accountability and transparency, and to provide a stronger role for Parliament.
The Government agrees with the intent of the recommendations.
However, a legislated mandate for ODA would not necessarily address these objectives and could hamper programming by reducing flexibility.
It could also limit the range of responses that might be required to meet fast-changing conditions in developing countries.
The Government does not rule out the possibility of future legislation governing ODA.
For the time being, however, the Government will adopt the following measures in response to both recommendations: 
-The single statement of purpose and the six program priorities identified in the Government's Policy Statement address directly the need for a clear mandate and stable goals for the ODA program.
-The Government welcomes an enhanced role for Parliament in reviewing ODA, including regular reviews of CIDA's performance.
Concerns over accountability and transparency, both to Parliament and to the public, will be met in part through revisions to Part III of the Main Estimates.
The aim will be to establish clearer objectives for programs and projects, to specify realistic expectations of results, and to prepare regular progress reports for the relevant committees of Parliament as well as Canada's ODA partners and the general public.
Comprehensive efforts are already under way to enhance CIDA's performance review and management functions.
*5.7 The Committee recommends that any functions of CIDA found to be essentially Canadian trade promotion activities be transferred to the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade or to the Export Development Corporation where they belong.
*5.8 It is entirely appropriate for the CIDA private sector development program (which we have recommended as a program priority) to encourage trading relations with Canada.
Response The Government agrees with these recommendations and is committed to ensuring the developmental focus of CIDA activities involving the private sector.
We share the Committee's assessment that measures to enhance trade in developing countries can exert a strong positive impact on development.
We believe that the Canadian private sector is an important development partner for CIDA and, in line with the emphasis of the Committee, we will work to foster developmentally beneficial long-term relationships between Canadian and developing-country private sectors through trade, investment and technology transfer.
In this context, CIDA is preparing a detailed policy on private-sector development.
The CIDA Industrial Co-operation Program (CIDA INC) provides a unique opportunity for the Canadian private sector to contribute to poverty reduction and sustainable development.
The participation of Canadian companies generates significant benefits for the private sector in developing countries.
The program is well regarded by developing countries, other donors and international organizations.
The Government will take steps to sharpen the development focus of CIDA INC and to ensure greater co-ordination between CIDA, the Export Development Corporation (EDC) and the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade (DFAIT).
To that end, CIDA INC will be required to engage in regular project-by-project consultations with DFAIT and the EDC.
*5.9 The Committee affirms that it is not part of the mandate of CIDA to promote Canadian exports, although there are particular circumstances where aid and trade objectives are complementary.
The Committee also recommends additional untying of Canadian aid, in concert with other donors.
Specifically, the government should work through the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD to lower the proportion of tied aid to 20% by the year 2000.
Response The Government shares the view that private-sector partnerships supported by CIDA must reflect the objective of supporting sustainable development in developing countries.
Canadian business and industry have a lot to offer developing countries, 
and Canadian goods and services have been used to great benefit in Canada's development assistance program.
The Government believes that current untying authorities, carefully applied, provide CIDA with sufficient flexibility and do not impede programming effectiveness.
Tied aid provisions help build relations of mutual benefit between Canada and developing countries.
In this regard the Government is conscious of the need to ensure that Canadian goods and services are appropriate and competitively priced.
Canada has long been active in international discussions on tied aid and related questions of cost-effectiveness, aid dependency and technical co-operation.
Canada is committed to working with the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD and others to ensure the effective use of ODA resources.
*5.10 The Committee recommends that, in supporting structural adjustment programs, CIDA should pay special attention to their effects on the poor and to the provision of assistance to protect vulnerable groups.
In addition, CIDA should broaden its own aid conditionality to include the reduction of excessive military expenditures and the increased transparency of government operations.
CIDA should also press for the reform of structural adjustment programs so as to make poverty reduction a central objective of development.
Response The Government agrees.
We share the view that further measures are warranted to improve structural adjustment programs, to broaden aid conditionality and to promote greater transparency.
We will work with international agencies, developing countries and affected groups to ensure that structural adjustment programs integrate objectives for poverty reduction, environmental protection, gender equality and human rights.
CIDA will continue its long-standing commitment to help vulnerable groups cope with the effects of adjustment.
Excessive military spending impedes the attainment of development objectives and diverts resources from social priorities.
In collaboration with other donor countries, Canada will consider collective actions that could influence changes in spending practices.
Transparency in government operations is an essential aspect of good governance.
The Government will continue to support this objective through policy dialogue and technical co-operation.
*5.11 The Committee affirms that human rights, good governance and democratic development are universal values that should find central expression in Canadian foreign policy, influencing and guiding other areas of policy.
Canada should seek to promote the global respect of these values through a wide range of instruments, including dialogue and programs of co-operation.
In the case of countries whose governments are responsible for serious violations of human rights, Canada should work with others to change such behaviour, resorting where necessary to measures up to and including the termination of bilateral assistance.
In such cases, Canada should continue to provide assistance to the poor and vulnerable groups through non-governmental organizations.
Response The Government agrees with the Committee's assessment that human rights, good governance and democratic development are universal values that should find central expression in Canadian foreign policy (see also the response to recommendation 3.7).
The Government therefore reaffirms its commitment to the International Centre for Human Rights and Democratic Development.
This Centre will continue to play an important role in the advancement of Canadian objectives.
The Government regards respect for human rights not only as a fundamental value, but also as a crucial element in the development of democratic and prosperous societies at peace with each other.
The essential challenge is to decide how we can best influence other governments to respect basic human rights.
Our ultimate aim is not to punish countries and innocent populations whose governments abuse human rights, but rather to change behaviour and to induce governments to respect their peoples' rights.
Responses to specific situations require careful balancing of many considerations -- above all the effectiveness of the means of influence at our disposal.
Canadian efforts to support human rights will rely on a variety of means, including dialogue and co-ordinated efforts through multilateral forums.
Development assistance is a constructive way to address human rights, democracy and governance issues.
As one of six priorities for ODA, assistance in this area will support such activities as peace and reconciliation initiatives, human rights education, widening access to legal remedies, strengthening legislatures and judicial systems, and increasing the capacity of organizations and other representatives of civil society to participate fully and effectively in decision making in their countries.
Canada will continue to work with a broad range of partners, including governments, NGOs and multilateral organizations to promote our objectives.
High-profile aid and trade measures may play a role in responding to gross, systematic and persistent violations of internationally agreed human rights standards.
Canadian assistance, for example, must not reward or give the impression of rewarding such government behaviour.
This can be achieved in a number of ways, as the Committee has suggested.
The Government will consider its actions on a case-by-case basis.
Canada will continue to lead on human rights issues at the UN, the OSCE, the Commonwealth, la Francophonie and the OAS.
Canada was instrumental in creating at the UN the office of High Commissioner for Human Rights, with a broad mandate for promotion, protection, prevention of human rights abuses of the kind that presage conflict, and co-ordination of human rights activities throughout the UN system.
These forums often provide the most effective means for influencing governments.
At the international financial institutions and in various aid donor groups, Canada will also emphasize the need to consider a recipient's commitment to good governance.
In particular, Canada will seek concerted action with others to influence governments that spend large sums on arms rather than on education and housing for their people.
*5.12 The Committee believes that Canadian assistance continues to be too dispersed and recommends that a greater share of ODA should go to fewer countries, bearing in mind the primary purpose of the aid program.
In choosing its list of recipients, Canada should maintain the current high share of assistance to Africa, review the balance of ODA allocations for other regions, and work closely with other donors to strengthen the co-ordination and complementarity of international assistance as a whole.
Response The Government agrees that the effectiveness of ODA can be enhanced by concentrating on a more limited number of priorities and achieving greater targeting and co-ordination of assistance.
Canada does, however, have important interests in all areas of the world.
The Government believes that a major portion of ODA resources should be focused on a limited number of countries, with programs maintained in other countries through low-cost, administratively simple delivery mechanisms.
The Government is in full agreement that Africa should continue to receive the highest proportion of ODA.
Regional allocations will be reviewed on a regular basis.
Within the OECD and other consultative groups as well as with other donors, Canada will continue to play a lead role in improving the co-ordination and coherence of development assistance.
The Government will take steps to strengthen consultations with Canadian development partners and also to ensure greater co-ordination between the various foreign policy instruments that have a bearing on development.
*5.13 The Committee recommends that Canada maintain active programs of assistance to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, and the former Soviet Union.
The Committee further recommends that funding for these programs not be at the expense of ODA priorities outlined above.
Response The Government agrees with the recommendation that Canada maintain active programs of assistance to Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) and the former Soviet Union (FSU), and that it ensure such programs are not funded at the expense of ODA priorities.
Canadian interests are directly engaged in ensuring the successful transformation of the region to democracy and market economies.
The establishment of open and prosperous market economies in the region will generate important trade and investment opportunities for Canada, yielding direct benefits to the Canadian economy.
Second, the integration of the region's economies into the global economic and trade systems will contribute to a more prosperous world economy and economic gains for all.
Third, the promotion and maintenance of stability in the region contributes directly to enhanced international security and stability.
The Canadian program utilizes a combination of programming approaches to ensure that Canada's assistance can respond to rapidly changing regional circumstances and Canadian interests.
In the first and most common instance, potential Canadian partners initiate project proposals.
In the second, the assistance program develops projects in response to Canadian government initiatives and requests from recipient governments.
In both instances program delivery is based on partnership: projects are implemented by the Canadian private sector, business and trade associations, NGOs, academic institutions, ethnic communities and all levels of government.
Federal funds are a catalyst: they leverage significant project contributions from Canadian and recipient-country partners. The result is a program significantly larger than federal funding alone could sustain.
To maximize effectiveness in changing conditions, the roles of DFAIT (which now administers the program) and CIDA will be reorganized.
Policy direction will remain with DFAIT while program delivery will be transferred to CIDA.
This new function for CIDA corresponds well with the activities it is conducting elsewhere in the world.
There will be close co-ordination between the two organizations over the continued development and execution of the program.
*5.14 The Committee recommends that Canada continue to be responsive to requests for emergency assistance but set eligibility criteria for emergency assistance to ensure that long-term development assistance remains the primary focus of the aid program.
Response The Government agrees with the need for a structured response to the provision of emergency assistance.
The Government's approach will include support for emergency prevention and preparedness, as well as the provision of basic health, nutrition, shelter and other necessities to the victims of crises.
Humanitarian assistance for the support and resettlement of refugees and displaced persons will also be provided as the necessary first step toward rehabilitation and a resumption of development.
Long-term development assistance will remain the primary purpose of the aid program.
*5.15 The Committee recommends that the share of allocations to partnership programs be maintained, and even increased, where partners have a clearly demonstrated record of effectiveness and efficiency.
CIDA should also be guided by the strength and depth of the Canadian support base as measured by such things as the commitment of volunteers to the organization and the ability to generate matching contributions.
Response The Government recognizes that Canadian non-governmental partner organizations can play an important role in policy development as well as in the planning and delivery of Canadian development assistance.
However, any decision as to the relative share of ODA allocations to NGO partners must take into account the severe fiscal situation that the Government and CIDA itself face.
Preference will be given to those partners who demonstrate the most effectiveness and efficiency, and who provide programming that is complementary to the objectives of the Government in promoting sustainable development.
In addition, special attention will be paid to supporting partners who can contribute their own financial resources and the time of volunteers, or who allow young people to serve abroad.
*5.16 The Committee recommends that the government commit itself to stabilizing ODA at the present GNP ratio and seek to make progress towards the 0.7% target when Canada's fiscal situation permits.
Response The Government remains committed to an active and effective Official Development Assistance program as a vital element of Canadian foreign policy.
Given present-day fiscal realities, however, all government programs are being reviewed and Canada's ODA program is no exception.
The Government is committed to making progress toward the target of 0.7 per cent when Canada's fiscal situation permits.
*5.17 Recognizing that expanded trade opportunities are more important than aid to many developing countries, the Committee also recommends that the government seek opportunities to open Canadian markets further to developing countries, particularly the least developed.
Response The Government fully agrees with the importance the Committee attaches to the role of open trading regimes in fostering development.
Canada is very much an open economy and the trade-related commitments made in the Uruguay Round will open it further.
Under the Uruguay Round Agreements, Canada has made a commitment to eliminate tariffs in a number of key sectors and to reduce remaining tariffs by an average of 40 per cent.
Canada extends a preferential tariff rate, the General Preferential Tariff (GPT), to certain imports from most developing countries.
The Government is conducting a full review of the GPT scheme in areas such as reducing tariff rates and enlarging product coverage, with a view to providing further benefits for the least developed countries (LDCs) and keeping in mind the potential impact on affected industries.
As regards non-tariff barriers, the Uruguay Round Agreements provide that the Multi-Fibre Arrangement quota system (covering textiles and clothing imports from developing countries) will be phased out over a 10-year period.
At the end of the period the only remaining protection for that sector will be tariffs, which are also being reduced as part of the Round's tariff commitments.
In addition, Canada will seek opportunities for extending technical assistance to help developing countries participate effectively in new trade arrangements (such as the WTO and the NAFTA).
*5.18 The Committee recommends the establishment of broader-based consultations on development co-operation, including the participation of Parliamentarians.
Response The Government agrees with this recommendation.
A wide range of partners inside and outside Canada play a vital role in Canada's ODA program.
Their contribution is essential to providing the range of expertise, knowledge and resources required to meet diverse challenges of development.
To succeed, development assistance must be a collective endeavour, and this requires a corresponding commitment to information sharing and ongoing consultation.
A broad range of consultations are held each year with CIDA's partners including development NGOs, business associations, universities and colleges, and environmental groups.
A schedule of consultations is prepared and published on a regular basis.
The Government will also work to strengthen its consultative process on development co-operation.
This will include future meetings of the National Forum on Canada's International Relations.
Chapter 6: Projecting Canadian Culture and Learning Abroad
*6.1 The Committee strongly recommends that international cultural, scientific, and educational affairs should be treated as a fundamental dimension of Canadian foreign policy.
*6.6 The Committee recommends that the Government of Canada, with the collaboration of interested provinces, give high priority to developing a strategy for Canada's international cultural, scientific, and educational relations.
Such a strategy should consider regulations and other means, including joint ventures with the private sector, of producing and distributing Canadian cultural output at home and abroad.
The strategy should address the specific circumstances and proposals, as outlined in John Ralston Saul's paper and the Hon. Serge Joyal's report, regarding the major cultural industries such as publishing, music, art, sports, television, motion pictures, and theatre.
The strategy, once completed, should be referred to the Foreign Affairs Standing Committees of Parliament.
Response The Government agrees.
We fully intend to pursue cultural, scientific and educational relations as key components of Canada's foreign relations.
In a period of economic globalization, when societies are increasingly open to the competitive pressures of the international economy, the role of culture as a binding force becomes of vital importance.
At the same time, as knowledge (in the form of technology, organization and innovation) is becoming a key element in international competitiveness, education plays a critical role as a contributor to prosperity.
Canada has unique advantages.
Our culture is highly diversified and recognized internationally for its excellence and dynamism; it also helps give all Canadians a sense of shared identity.
At the same time, our educational institutions are among the best in the world; as sources of research and centres for innovation and learning, they are increasingly aware of the role they play in enhancing our international competitiveness.
The Government intends to support both sectors in the most effective and cost-efficient way possible.
Canada's cultural foreign policy seeks to:
-make Canada a leader in the new world economy by projecting the image of a country that is unique, creative, innovative and hence competitive;
-protect our cultural sovereignty;
-undergird the Canadian identity by exhibiting its most creative aspects on the international scene;
and -promote the growth and vitality of the culture and education sectors, and thereby help create jobs.
In this spirit, the Government believes in the promotion of all aspects of Canada's multi-faceted cultures.
In the past year, the Government has taken numerous initiatives to extend Canada's cultural presence abroad and increase the impact of ongoing international cultural marketing efforts.
Recently, the Government:
-created a Canada-US.-Mexico Creative Artists' Residencies Program;
-sponsored a conference on Canadian education and the Asia-Pacific region in Vancouver from March 9 to 11;
-signed film, television and video co-operation agreements with Japan, Chile, Sweden and Brazil ; 
signed a Memorandum of Understanding on Cultural Co-operation with Hong Kong;
appointed the first-ever Minister (Cultural Affairs) at the Canadian Embassy in Paris;
and -organized a major Canadian cultural festival in Mexico City, marking the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Canada and Mexico.
Ongoing international cultural initiatives include:
-film, television, and video co-production agreements with 26 countries, generating more than $300 million of business per year in each of the last three years; 
-museological agreements with France and Mexico to facilitate co-operation and exchanges, and to position Canadian technology and expertise in these markets;
and -programs to assist in the development and commercialization of cultural products in collaboration with the private sector
-- for example, the Sound Recording Development Program, the international marketing assistance component of the Book Publishing Industry Development Program, and the international distribution component of the Publication Distribution Assistance Program.
Future activity in the international cultural field will be made more central in the management of foreign policy and operations.
As a first step, the Cultural Affairs Bureau of DFAIT, whose functions were being eliminated by the last Government, has been reinforced and will henceforth report to the Assistant Deputy Minister responsible for global issues.
Further steps are under active consideration to enhance this critical dimension of Canadian foreign policy.
In developing strategy at the federal level, DFAIT will work closely with the Department of Canadian Heritage and with cultural agencies.
This undertaking will take into account the contributions made by witnesses before the Special Joint Committee and the many useful suggestions brought forward in the Committee's report.
Regular consultations with the Foreign Affairs Committees of Parliament will be welcomed.
*6.2 The Committee further recommends that Canada's international cultural, scientific, and educational foreign policy seek to:
*6.2A affirm Canada's cultural sovereignty.
*6.7 As suggested in the Chapter on trade, the Government of Canada should use the cultural industries exemption provided under the NAFTA and the FTA to introduce regulatory and any other measures to protect and promote Canadian cultural industries.
*6.8 The government should seek alliances with like-minded countries in future international negotiations to recognize the need to protect and promote national cultures.
Response (see also response to recommendation 3.2C)
The Government agrees.
The continuing existence of a dynamic, unique space of our own in the North American cultural environment is fundamental to Canada's sense of purpose and identity.
The Government will continue to work closely with like-minded countries that recognize the need to protect and promote their national identity and cultural values.
Within the G-7 and at the Miami Summit of the Americas, Canada obtained recognition by all participants (including the United States) that governments have an important role to play in promoting "diversity of content, including cultural and linguistic diversity" in the emerging global information society.
Canada is negotiating an enlarged agreement with the Council of Europe allowing Canada to participate fully in all activities of the Council relating to culture and cultural heritage.
Canada has also established a mechanism for annual policy consultations with the EU on cultural matters.
In addition, Canada's participation in cultural activities within la Francophonie and the Commonwealth provide it with opportunities to strengthen relations with like-minded countries.
When necessary, the Government has negotiated exemptions for Canadian cultural industries within the WTO, FTA and NAFTA.
*6.2 The Committee further recommends that Canada's international cultural, scientific, and educational foreign policy seek to:
*6.2B assist Canada in becoming a major participant in the global knowledge- based economy.
Response The Government agrees.
Canada's participation in the global knowledge-intensive economy is not only a foreign policy issue.
It involves other levels of government, the private sector, institutions of higher education, NGOs and others.
The Government recently released a Government-wide action plan, Building a More Innovative Economy, which focuses on four interdependent areas for action:
-building a healthier marketplace;
-expanding trade;
-building efficient infrastructure;
and -technology -- innovating instead of falling behind.
A key component of the Government's plan to build a more innovative economy is the task of transforming today's telephone, cable and computer networks into a fully integrated system -- the information highway.
The United States, Europe and Japan have launched massive programs to build their information highways. Our present information infrastructure and networks would soon become inadequate without rapid development.
The Government will adopt a series of policies and programs to encourage the builders and users of the information highway.
One element of this strategy is to give Canadians access to competitive regional and global mobile satellite facilities enabling them to tap into wireless telecommunications services (cellular telephones, paging, broadcasting).
These initiatives will clear the way for new radio-based services such as digital broadcasting, personal communications devices, advanced mobile satellites and wireless cable TV.
Another element is to extend the Canadian Network for the Advancement of Research, Industry and Education (CANARIE).
The Government will support CANARIE's business plan to speed the development of key parts of the information highway, including inter alia the creation of a high-speed experimental network to test advanced networking technologies, and an increase in the speed and reach of the Canadian Internet network.
Expanding SchoolNet -- a joint federal, provincial and territorial initiative to electronically connect schools, libraries, community colleges, universities and hospitals in Canada -- is another element of the strategy, one that will provide Canadians with valuable and exciting electronic services in the global information economy.
While Canada is strong in science, many of the new technologies needed by our industry come from abroad.
The Government will therefore seek to foster:
-the acquisition of newest best-practice technologies by industry;
-awareness of Canadian science-and-technology capabilities by potential foreign partners and investors of venture capital;
-participation of Canadian businesses in international R&D alliances;
and -a framework of international rules that allow unfettered access to international technology opportunities.
The Government will also encourage and promote institution-to-institution links between Canadian cultural and educational institutions and their counterparts abroad.
Science and Technology Counsellors are stationed in a number of Canada's major missions abroad to promote exchanges and collaboration in the field of science and technology.
In addition, over the next five years a network of up to 10 education centres will be established in the Asia-Pacific region to promote Canadian educational institutions.
*6.2 The Committee further recommends that Canada's international cultural, scientific, and educational foreign policy seek to: 
*6.2 Contribute to the vitality of the arts and higher education;
*6.2D promote the export of Canadian cultural and educational products.
Response The Government agrees.
International activities are essential to the vitality of Canadian arts and higher education.
The International Cultural Relations program of DFAIT provides financial assistance enabling Canadian artists and scholars to reach international standards of excellence, and making it possible to showcase Canadian accomplishments on the international scene.
The promotion of Canadian cultural, heritage, and educational products, services and expertise is an integral part of the Government's International Business Development Program.
Cultural industries have been identified as one of our priorities. We will continue to support the international co-production strategy of the Canadian film and television industry. At the same time we will assist exporters of cultural and educational products to participate in specialized trade fairs and missions.
Increasingly, the Government is working closely with industry to enhance opportunities for Canadian cultural exports to the United States and beyond.
The Government already supports the production (via the Canada Council) and the distribution of Canadian publishing through a number of programs.
Given the excellence of Canadian cultural and educational products, it will be important to champion our creative talent as never before.
For this reason, one can expect that Canada's cultural and educational industries will continue to grow at double the rate of the rest of the labour market in Canada.
*6.2 The Committee further recommends that Canada's international cultural, scientific, and educational foreign policy seek to: 
*6.2E facilitate the transfer of knowledge.
Response The Government agrees.
It is furthering this objective through its initiatives to promote the liberalization of trade and investment, and to conclude cultural and science-and-technology agreements.
Through active consultations with the provinces and the private sector, the Government seeks continually to adapt programs and procedures to the changing international environment; it also works to identify opportunities for enhanced information and R&D exchanges as a basis for increased competitiveness.
The Government will examine ways of enhancing results in this area, in co-operation with the provinces.
*6.3 The Committee encourages the government to seek the collaboration of interested provinces in the implementation of Canada's international cultural, scientific and educational foreign policy, through the effective use of mechanisms such as the Federal-Provincial Consultative Committee on Education-Related International Activities.
Response The Government agrees.
It intends to work with other levels of government in all areas of mutual interest.
The federal system has shown remarkable flexibility in accommodating the changes needed to manage federal-provincial relations in the field of international relations, as evidenced most recently by the "Trade Team Canada" approach.
Similarly, Québec's and New Brunswick's position in la Francophonie are assets for Canadian foreign policy and further examples of federalism's flexibility.
With regard to consultative mechanisms, the Government regularly conducts high-level consultations with the provinces (such as the periodic First Ministers' conferences).
The Government is renewing its Memorandum of Understanding with the Council of Ministers of Education of Canada, an agreement that forms the basis for ongoing consultations in the area of international higher education.
Other mechanisms are helping to examine priorities in their respective areas of responsibility; these include the meeting of ministers responsible for culture and historical resources, and the Federal-Provincial-Territorial Sport Committee.
Support for international tours by Canadian artists is co-ordinated with the provinces through ongoing working-level contacts, and all provinces are invited to take part in official bilateral cultural consultations.
The Government is prepared to explore other mechanisms for collaboration and consultation with all provinces.
*6.4 The Committee recommends that the Government of Canada give careful consideration to the creation of scholarship and exchange programs that would involve the private sector in an essential way, to allow Canadian students to spend short, though meaningful, periods in centres of higher learning beyond the United States and traditional European destinations,
and to allow students from those countries to do the same in Canada.
It would be useful if such programs included provisions for keeping track of their alumni.
Response The Government agrees that Canada's capacity to compete in the global knowledge-based economy will depend, in great part, on the next generation developing the knowledge and skills necessary to deal with other cultures and to operate effectively in foreign environments.
To this end, Canada operates the Government of Canada Awards program on a reciprocal basis with Japan, France, Germany, Italy and Mexico.
In addition, a Canadian initiative resulted in the introduction of the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Program over 30 years ago.
Canada continues to offer more awards under this program than most other Commonwealth countries. Canadians are the recipients of over 120 Commonwealth scholarships annually.
Last year, the Government also renewed the Canada-China Scholarly Exchange Program under which up to 20 students are exchanged annually.
Nonetheless, it is clear more needs to be done.
The Government, through close co-operation between the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade and the Department of Human Resources Development, is negotiating with the European Union a program of educational co-operation that will involve both universities and colleges and address some of the barriers to academic mobility.
The program should ensure the participation of European countries beyond the traditional academic destinations of Britain and France.
Similarly, Canada has been aggressively pursuing North American co-operation in higher education, research and training, and is now negotiating a program with the United States and Mexico which will support student mobility among the three countries.
Finally, it is working toward being in a position to participate within the next two years in the program of University Mobility in Asia-Pacific.
Apart from positioning Canadians to participate fully in the global economic community, such scholarship programs are also a fundamental means of ensuring that future foreign leaders will be aware of the sophisticated offerings of the Canadian marketplace.
The Department has also been attempting to trace alumni of the Government of Canada scholarship program.
A few years ago a tracer study was undertaken for the Commonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Program.
We will analyze the capacity to maintain an ongoing tracking system for foreign scholars studying in Canada under such programs to build strong alumni relationships for the future.
*6.5 The Committee wishes to encourage the Canadian universities which are home to a sizeable number of foreign students to adopt the practice, widespread in other countries, of keeping track of foreign students when they return to their home country, by corresponding with them regularly, by encouraging the formation of alumni groups in foreign countries and by inventing new means of staying in touch.
Response Many Canadian universities have already recognized the importance of maintaining ongoing contact with their foreign alumni and are implementing effective ways to do so.
For its part, the DFAIT is drawing the recommendations of the Committee to the attention of the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada, the Association of Canadian Community Colleges, and the Canadian Bureau for International Education so that they may bring them to the attention of their membership.
In addition, DFAIT will seize other opportunities to encourage Canadian universities and colleges to follow-up on this recommendation.
Canada's missions abroad will assist universities and colleges in this effort where practical.
*6.9 The Committee also recommends that the Government of Canada dedicate itself to the promotion of a vibrant Canadian culture by increasing its support for creative artists and creative scholars, and to the development of the means necessary for the distribution at home and abroad of what these artists and scholars create.
Response The Government agrees.
The vitality of Canada's cultural and academic community is largely dependant upon its access to, and success on, the international stage.
In this light, the Government recognizes the leading role it must take in support of Canada's international cultural industries and educational services.
Canada has opened Canadian Education Centres in Taipei and Seoul.
The Government will expand the network to include Malaysia, China, Indonesia, Vietnam, Thailand, Singapore, Hong Kong, the Philippines and, subject to specific marketing studies, most probably Tokyo, due to their remarkable success.
This model, with variations as required, may be expanded to other regions of the world.
The Government is examining ways to strengthen further its capacity to market effectively both cultural industries and educational services.
*6.10 In addition, the Committee recommends that the Government of Canada seek the co-operation of interested provincial governments to increase support for the "internationalization" of education, that is, support for academic and student mobility, institutional exchanges, and the development of international research and development networks.
*6.13 The Committee therefore recommends that the government give careful consideration to programs that will assist Canadian scholars, academics and institutions of higher education in their international exchanges where these will be of benefit to Canada.
Response The Government has enjoyed excellent relations with the provinces, through the Council of Ministers of Education of Canada (CMEC), in the area of education-related international activities.
The CMEC has been invited to participate in meetings on North American co-operation in higher education, research and training as well as in round tables leading to strengthened co-operation in education with the European Union.
It has similarly been represented at education-related meetings of APEC.
Occasionally, individual provinces have also had representatives at these meetings.
The Government intends to build on this co-operation as it addresses the requirement for the "internationalization" of higher education.
Canada is currently negotiating a program of co-operation in education and training with the European Union and a similar program with the United States and Mexico, as indicated in the response to recommendation 6.4.
In addition, we expect to be able to participate within the next two years in the program of University Mobility in Asia Pacific.
*6.11 The Committee therefore recommends that the government reaffirm the lead role of the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade in developing international cultural, scientific, and educational policy at the federal level.
It further recommends the consolidation of relevant program monies currently dispersed throughout the Department within an expanded International Cultural, Scientific and Educational Branch.
Finally, it recommends that the government review the programs of the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade and the relevant programs of other Departments and agencies with a view to consolidating the relevant programs under Foreign Affairs.
It also recommends that Canadian diplomats be given the incentives and the tools necessary to become effective salespersons for Canadian culture, science, and education.
Response The Government agrees that DFAIT should exercise the lead role in further developing international cultural, scientific and educational policy at the federal level.
As a first step, the Cultural Affairs Bureau of DFAIT, whose functions were being eliminated by the last Government, has been reinforced and will henceforth report the Assistant Deputy Minister responsible for global issues.
Programs relevant to these issues will be identified within DFAIT, with a view to increasing their effectiveness as part of the Government's international cultural relations strategy.
The incentives and tools necessary for Canadian diplomats will also be examined as part of the strategy.
*6.12 The Committee recommends that the government continue to give strong support to the promotion of Canadian studies abroad.
Response The Government agrees.
In part through Government support to date, there are Canadian studies programs in universities in about 35 countries.
Most of these countries are represented in the 20 national and multinational Canadian studies associations around the world with more than 6000 members.
The associations and their members make an important contribution to knowledge and understanding of Canada in their own countries.
They reach current and future decision makers and opinion formers through their work.
They also contribute to research and dialogue in international and domestic areas of priority interest to Canada.
The Government intends to give priority to encouraging teaching, research and publication about Canada by faculty in foreign universities.
In addition to the International Council for Canadian Studies, our emphasis will be G-7 countries and those priority countries in the developed and developing world where there are Canadian studies associations.
*6.14 The Committee recognizes the importance of programs such as Radio Canada International (RCI) and the Canada Council translation programs for Canadian literature abroad.
Every effort should be made to exploit more fully the potential of RCI in particular to project Canada abroad.
Response The Government takes note of this recommendation that every effort be made to exploit the potential of Radio Canada International and Canada Council translation programmes.
Indeed, by portraying Canada and Canadian values abroad, RCI can play an important role in promoting international peace and understanding.
Dialogue and compromise; promoting democracy, human rights, economic and social justice; caring for the environment; safeguarding peace; and respect for diversity are values which RCI is eminently well-placed to project abroad.
Moreover, RCI and other free media, have an important role to play in ensuring truth, transparency, and justice through the interplay of free and diverse sources of information.
Chapter 7: Where Canada Fits In
*7.1 The Committee recommends that Canadian policy be driven by the need to protect our vital interests: the preservation of Canadian sovereignty and independence, and the capacity to play the sort of active and independent role in the world that Canadians demand.
We believe that such a policy requires a commensurate allocation of resources to the instruments to implement it, be they in the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade and its missions abroad, other government departments engaged abroad, or in Parliament.
Response The Government agrees that Canadian policy should be driven by the need to protect our vital interests.
The Government is strongly committed to meeting its fiscal objectives and to applying sound financial management to government operations.
Priorities will be set with fiscal constraints in mind. Reallocation of resources will be made on this basis.
Operational adjustments are also being made -- including a better use of technology -- to enhance the efficiency of program delivery.
Further substantive actions in this direction are expected to emerge from the comprehensive program review.
*7.2 Given the substantial powers now being exercised by the US. Congress, particularly in trade matters affecting Canadian interests, it is necessary to find effective ways to bring Canadian concerns directly to the attention of Congressmen and Senators.
We believe the Canada-US. Inter-Parliamentary Group has this potential.
However, Parliament should revise its selection procedures to ensure that future delegations comprise Parliamentarians chosen for their knowledge of specific items on the agenda.
The Group should also work closely with the relevant standing committees and the Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Response The Government agrees that it is extremely important for Canada to promote vigorously its interests in the US. Congress.
Our Embassy in Washington has established a special unit for Congressional relations to ensure that Congressional leaders are aware of Canadian positions on specific US. legislative measures.
The Ambassador will continue to meet regularly with Congressional leaders and other US. decision makers.
All Canadian offices will be called upon to play an increasing advocacy role with Congressional Representatives and Senators in their territory as well as with state legislators.
The annual meeting of the Canada-United States Inter-Parliamentary Group is a very useful mechanism for the exchange of views on bilateral issues.
More frequent and well-prepared meetings on specific sectors or issues would be welcome.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade is prepared to liaise closely with the Parliamentary Group to assist in preparations for the meetings and to provide substantive briefings on the issues.
*7.3 The Committee recommends that the government set policy and program priorities on the basis of objectives that reflect Canadian interests, values, and comparative advantages.
Within regions, we should seek strategic bilateral partnerships, based on a combination of a country's regional importance, its political or cultural ties with Canada, and its potential contribution to the achievement of Canada's objectives.
Response The Government agrees with the approach of the Committee and will establish its program priorities to serve the global objectives of foreign policy.
Bilateral relations and multilateral associations will serve as means for the achievement of objectives, and will receive priority according to the degree to which these objectives are furthered.
*7.4 The Committee reaffirms Canada's commitment to the goal of a rules-based international system, built on expanding the application of international law, 
and on making multilateral institutions more effective, better managed and more democratically accountable.
For this purpose the Committee recommends a strategy of "directed multilateralism", that is, a strategy which gives priority to those institutions that best serve Canadian interests.
This should be combined with vigorous bilateral co-operation with like-minded countries best situated to help advance the common cause.
Beyond the Commonwealth and la Francophonie, the targets for this strategy should include the United Nations (UN) and the specialized agencies, the World Trade Organization (WTO), the International Financial Institutions and the Group of Seven (G-7).
Canada should actively promote the early establishment of the WTO.
It should also promote urgent and thoroughgoing reform of the UN system and the Bretton Woods institutions.
The relevant standing committees of Parliament should reassess Canada's membership in the various multilateral institutions, with a view to making recommendations about its future participation.
Response The Government agrees with the Committee
and is committed to the goal of a rules-based international system, built on expanding the application of international law, and on making multilateral institutions more effective, better managed and more democratically accountable.
The Government will continue to take initiatives toward the realization of this goal.
At the same time, the Government recognizes that participation in multilateral institutions is not an end in itself but a means to an end.
Canada will give priority to the institutions that can best meet our objectives.
These are to promote prosperity and employment; to protect our security within a stable global framework; and to project Canadian values and culture.
Within multilateral institutions, Canada will not remain confined to traditional partnerships.
Instead, it will seek alliances with countries on the basis of shared interests and objectives, according to the issues under consideration.
As suggested by the Committee, an important Canadian objective is reform of the United Nations system, especially its peace and security function.
Also important is early consideration by the WTO of unfinished business (e.g., agricultural export subsidies, trade remedy laws) and new issues (e.g., competition policy, environment, labour).
In addition, the Bretton Woods institutions and the regional development banks are central to world development.
The Government will pursue their reform through the upcoming Halifax Economic Summit.
The Government welcomes the intent of the relevant Standing Committees to examine further Canada's membership in various multilateral institutions.
Chapter 8: The Democratization of Foreign Policy
*8.1 One proposal made in this context is for a "Centre for Foreign Policy Development" that would identify priorities for analysis and contribute to the public debate.
Response The Government agrees that there should be greater dialogue among Canadians about their foreign policy and Canada's international relations in general.
The Government has met and will continue to meet its commitment to engage Parliament in debate on major foreign policy issues.
The first National Forum on Canada's International Relations, held last March, was another major step in this direction.
The Forum is to be an annual event; the next one will be held in the spring in Toronto, on the general theme of reforming international institutions.
On the model of its regular consultations with the business community through the International Trade Advisory Committee (ITAC) and Sectoral Advisory Groups on International Trade (SAGIT) processes, and with partners in the NGO-human rights community, 
the Government will expand and institutionalize this process by establishing active consultations with other groups and individuals interested in the international dimensions of economic relations, development and political affairs 
The Government also believes that dialogue must be a process that goes on throughout the year across the country.
For that reason the Government has decided to create a new mechanism for foreign policy consultations and outreach within the Department of Foreign Affairs.
Its function will be to stimulate public consultation and research on foreign policy issues, bringing together government practitioners, experts, Members of Parliament and citizens.
In addition, it will ensure that the Government engages Canadians in all aspects of its foreign policy on a systematic basis.
END
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AEPS - Arctic Environmental Protection Strategy
APEC - Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation
ARF - ASEAN Regional Forum
ASEAN - Association of Southeast Asian Nations
CANARIE - Canadian Network for the Advancement of Research, Industry and Education 
CCW - Convention on Chemical Weapons
CEE - Central and Eastern Europe
CFSI - Canadian Foreign Service Institute
CHS - Committee on Hemispheric Security
CIDA - Canadian International Development Agency
CJTF's - Combined Joint Task Forces
CSCE - Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe
CTBT - Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty
DFAIT - Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade, Canada 
EBRD - European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EDC - Export Development Corporation
FEARO - Federal Environmental Assessment Review Office (now called the Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency - CEAA)
FITT - Forum for International Trade Training
FSU - Former Soviet Union
FTA - Free Trade Agreement
FTAA -Free Trade Area of the Americas
GATT - General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GNP - Gross National Product
GPT - General Preferential Tariff
IDRC -International Development Research Centre
IFI's - International Financial Institutions
ILO - International Labour Organization
IMF - International Monetary Fund
ISO -International Organization for Standardization
ITAC - International Trade Advisory Committee
ITBP - International Trade Business Plan
IWGF - Intergovernmental Working Group on Forests
NAAEO - North American Agreement on Environmental Co-operation
NAFO - Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization
NAFTA - North American Free Trade Agreement
NATO - North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NGO's - Non-governmental Organizations
NORAD - North American Aerospace Defence Command
NPT - Non-Proliferation Treaty
OAS - Organization of American States
OAU - Organization of African Unity
ODA - Official Development Assistance
ODIHR - Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
OECD - Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
OSCE - Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (formerly the CSCE)
RCI - Radio Canada International
SAGIT - Sectoral Advisory Group on International Trade
SILIC's - Severely-indebted low-income countries
SME's - Small and medium-sized enterprises
UNCED - United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UNCLOS III -United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea III
UNCTAD - United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNEP -United Nations Environmental Program
WEU - Western European Union
WTO - World Trade Organization
END
Report of THE NATIONAL FORUM ON CANADA'S INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
by Pierre S. Pettigrew and Janice Gross Stein Co-Chairs of the National Forum submitted to the
MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS, THE HONOURABLE ANDRÉ OUELLET MINISTER OF NATIONAL DEFENCE, THE HONOURABLE DAVID COLLENETTE MINISTER FOR INTERNATIONAL TRADE, THE HONOURABLE ROY MACLAREN April 15, 1994 
The first National Forum on Canada's International Relations met at a time of dramatic change in the global environment.
Forum members met in intensive workshops for two days and in plenary session with the Prime Minister and the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and National Defence, and the Minister for International Trade.
Participants were asked to identify the most important economic, technological, scientific, social, cultural, political, and military forces that are directly relevant to Canada and Canadian policy;
to consider the principles and priorities of Canadian foreign and defence policies;
to address the kinds of multilateral, regional, bilateral, and transnational partnerships that Canadians should build;
and to examine how Canadians can best build policies that can meet the challenges of an increasingly global and multilayered international society and command public support and engagement.
Forum participants identified several important challenges as they grappled with the principles and priorities of Canada's international relations.
Drawing from the diversity of views expressed at the Forum, this report expresses the sense of the discussion among its participants.
While the general principles that underpin Canadian foreign policy enjoyed wide support, members of the Forum emphasized the necessity to make choices among priorities.
Forum participants emphasized that dramatic changes in the global system, the close connection between foreign and domestic policy, fiscal constraints at home, and the need to democratize Canada's international relations 
-- all demand that Canadians and their government make the difficult, but careful and forward-looking choices that maximize Canada's capacity to be effective.
Forum members spoke of the new realities of sovereignty in the global environment, the importance of active engagement, and the need to make the most effective use of Canadian resources as guiding principles of Canadian foreign and defence policies.
*1. The New Sovereignty: Opportunities, Constraints, and Institutional Lags.
Forum participants identified a striking irony.
Now that the Cold War is over, the Government of Canada, like other governments, has greater freedom to make independent choices, but is simultaneously more constrained by international institutions and transnational flows of capital, investment, finance, and trade.
Governments with less autonomy must at the same time address a broadening international agenda that includes trade, finance, investment, migration, sustainable development, human rights, and defence.
The Canadian government also faces constraints at home.
A serious problem of indebtedness increasingly limits the Government's ability to engage abroad as well as at home while Canadian society faces a growing problem of structural unemployment and underemployment.
Members of the Forum felt strongly that the Government must make more efficient use of its resources and get its economic house in order as it pursues its objectives in the global community.
Participants in the Forum also emphasized that foreign policy is no longer the domain only of governments but of broad sectors of society that engage actively in international activity.
Greater participation has been made possible by new information technology and a sense of shared affinities across borders.
Business and professional associations, aboriginal peoples, and non-governmental organizations, among others, are all active participants in our international relations.
The complex network of transnational relationships between Canadians and people in other societies creates a much broader arena for Canada's international relations.
Members of the Forum identified a second paradox.
Even though international relations have broadened, the institutional capacity of the Government to manage new relationships has not kept pace.
Government is limited by fiscal constraints and a lagging institutional response at home.
Government is consequently often seen as unresponsive and ineffective.
Forum participants emphasized that these constraints must be recognized but not exaggerated.
Canadians have a wealth of resources that they can use to engage in international and transnational activity.
Canadians are looking for new kinds of foreign policies.
Forum members urged the Government to mobilize domestic and non-governmental institutions and to co-ordinate human, intellectual, scientific, and social capital as well as financial, political, and military resources to make Canada's international relations more effective and efficient.
*2. Active Engagement in the New International Environment.
Participants in the Forum insisted that the benefits to Canada of active participation in the global system are potentially enormous.
The traditional distinction between foreign and domestic policy is no longer meaningful as the international system increasingly shapes our daily lives.
Canada's economic prosperity, cultural distinctiveness, environmental sustainability, and military security depend, to a greater extent than ever before, on Canada's capacity to engage successfully in the global system.
Forum members emphasized that Canada faces a dramatically different kind of security environment.
The threat of direct attack on our territory and on our allies is no longer immediate.
The principal threats to Canada's security come from forces that threaten global security:
demographic pressures; environmental degradation; poverty; proliferation of weapons of mass destruction; ethnic and regional wars; and instability in the territories of the former Soviet Union.
The adage that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure is directly relevant to Canada's international relations.
The new global challenges require new policies, new instruments, and a different distribution of resources.
*3. Comparative Advantage and the Necessity of Choice.
Participants in the Forum recognized that in this broader conception of international relations, the Government cannot be everywhere and do everything.
Nor should it try.
The Government cannot legitimately be expected to do more and more with less and less.
The Government must improve its capacity to mobilize and co-ordinate society's resources in the pursuit of national objectives.
It must also identify areas of comparative advantage where interests, skills, and expertise co-mingle and establish clear priorities.
Priorities Participants in the Forum identified several broad priorities of Canada's foreign and defence policies. There was less agreement in identifying existing and specific priorities that could be de-emphasized.
*1. Human Security.
"Canadian foreign policy," one participant in the Forum cogently argued, "is the progressive adjustment of national goals and interests to the requirements of international human security.
It is the management of our common future."
Human security includes human rights, economic prosperity, environmentally sustainable development, and good governance.
Participants in the Forum emphasized that Canadian foreign policy must promote human security and support the system of institutions and programs that serve to safeguard the individual's capacity to participate freely and constructively in society.
*2. Trade and Economic Relations.
International economic relations are fundamental to Canada's capacity to create jobs and prosperity and must remain an important priority of our foreign policy.
The well-being of our citizens continues to be highly dependent on foreign trade and easy access to foreign investment and technology.
International trade has become much more competitive and now involves reciprocal investment and partnerships, licensing, joint technology development, and access to channels of distribution.
Knowledge-based goods and services are becoming an increasingly important component of international trade and competition.
Competition for foreign investment has increased significantly in post-Cold War Europe and in the dynamic Asia-Pacific.
Our capacity to function effectively in this more competitive and complex world economy will be influenced significantly by domestic economic development, regulatory and taxation policies, and by trade policies that seek to maintain our position in established markets and to secure reasonable access to significant new markets.
Participants in the Forum emphasized that the Government will have to ensure that Canada derives full benefit from the market access gained through NAFTA and that market access is not eroded through unfair and unilateral trade practices by our partners.
Members of the Forum also cautioned that the Government must be sensitive to the social costs of liberalized international trade and assist the adjustment and retraining of those who are disadvantaged.
*3. Human Rights.
The linkage between the two fundamental priorities of trade and human rights was the subject of intensive discussion.
Participants in the Forum recognized that trade facilitates contact, empowers important segments of communities against oppressive governments, and provides opportunities for Canada to express its strong commitment to the observance of basic human rights.
Pursuit of commercial interests and human rights is not incompatible, but Canada must assert its fundamental commitment to human rights as part of the broader web of relations.
*4. Assistance.
Members of the Forum agreed that assistance to the poorest is a fundamental priority of Canadian policy.
The most important form of assistance to the poor is the opening of Canadian markets to their exports and the development of enhanced, reciprocal trading relationships.
Participants in the Forum emphasized that trade promotion should be separated from Canada's assistance programs.
Canada's aid policy should then focus on environmental sustainability, humanitarian assistance, and the development of social capital and human resources, particularly women.
Here, too, Forum members urged intensive co-operation with non-governmental organizations and the business community.
*5. Peacekeeping.
Even as peacekeeping is being redefined internationally, it remains a fundamental priority and an area of comparative advantage for Canada.
Canada's approach to peacekeeping must include more than a military component, and be broadly based in Canadian society through close co-ordination with the non-governmental organizations that are a fundamental part of peace-building.
Members of the Forum urged that Canada lead in the effort to build better international machinery for peacekeeping and export its comparative advantage in logistics, signalling, training, and experience.
Canada must also identify general guidelines and priorities for its participation that make the best use of its skills, and reinforce its interests and other policy commitments.
*6. United Nations.
Participants in the Forum agreed that the United Nations is a major asset to Canada that we must enhance and protect.
They recognized, however, that the United Nations and its agencies function unevenly.
While some work superbly, others are creaking and in need of significant repair.
Members of the Forum urged strongly that, in the context of the 50th anniversary of the creation of the United Nations, in 1995, Canada lead internationally in the attempt to reform the United Nations, its system of governance, and its specialized agencies, and contribute principally to those agencies that are efficient and accountable.
*7. Defence.
Defence policy did not receive as much detailed consideration at the Forum as some other elements of Canada's international relations.
Many of those who discussed defence argued that Canada now has a unique opportunity to restructure its forces to meet the challenges of the new global environment where Canada and its traditional allies are no longer threatened directly.
They argued that Canadian defence policy must provide for the territorial security of Canada, protection of our airspace and coastal waters, and aid to the civil power,
and then concentrate on more specialized forces and roles that can enhance our contribution to global security and complement our foreign policy.
This emphasis is consistent with the focus on limited resources to develop comparative advantage and enhance effectiveness.
*8. NATO.
Participants in the Forum were divided in their evaluation of the continuing usefulness of NATO now that the Cold War has ended.
Many considered that NATO was less relevant to Canada in an era when a wealthy Europe can mobilize the resources to assure its security.
Others considered NATO useful to Canada to demonstrate a continued commitment to a Europe free of military conflict.
There was a general consensus that it is useful to continue our membership in NATO, but that Canada must use its membership to encourage NATO to redefine its military vocation.
Some participants urged that Canada re-examine its financial obligations, concentrate on the specialized expertise that Canada has, and offer NATO what Canada can best deliver.
Multilateralism and Strategic Partnerships Participants in the Forum saw no contradiction between Canada's multilateral commitments and several strategic partnerships that are of great importance to Canada.
They broadened the concept of strategic partnership to include not only partners abroad but also those at home that can work with the Government to make Canada's international relations more effective.
*1. The United States.
Members of the Forum emphasized that Canada needs to pay particular attention to our special relationship with the United States, our most important trading partner and the world's only superpower.
There was concern among some about Canada's strong and growing economic and trade dependence on the United States.
Many at the Forum expect increased friction as the United States is tempted to act unilaterally to protect its interests in the international trading system where its dominance is no longer unquestioned.
*2. Strategic Partnerships.
Participants in the Forum urged greater concentration on regions of dynamic economic growth.
China, other Pacific Rim countries, Europe, Mexico and future NAFTA partners in the Americas may all prove to be important and effective partners that can also balance our relationship with the United States.
*3. Multilateral Institutions.
Participants in the Forum agreed overwhelmingly that strengthening rule-based regimes and multilateral institutions are central objectives in Canadian international trade and security policy.
Rule-based regimes are fundamental to advancing and serving Canadian interests, even as they promote global security.
Multilateral, rule-based regimes give Canada influence and access beyond what its size and economy would suggest.
A priority for Canada should be the creation or reform of multilateral institutions, particularly the World Trade Organization and the United Nations, that are most important to our interests.
Forum members insisted, however, that commitment to membership in multilateral institutions is an insufficient basis for policy.
In every institution, whether a trade or a security organization, Canada needs specialized policies that maximize its comparative advantage.
*4. Choices.
The private sector and non-governmental organizations are making choices about where to concentrate their efforts so that they can be most effective.
Participants in the Forum urged the Government to be strategic and focussed in its participation in multilateral organizations to avoid spreading its limited resources thinner and thinner until they lose their effectiveness.
Many at the Forum argued that Canada is not leveraging its memberships as effectively as it could, that its attention is not focussed on institutions that are central to its interests, and, consequently, that Canada's ability to dedicate the resources necessary to support a diffuse level of activity is impaired.
Members of the Forum urged the Government to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of multilateral institutions.
They suggested that Canada commit its resources largely to those institutions that are both efficient and centrally relevant to the new international environment.
Canada should also consider redeploying some resources to new kinds of organizations like the Inuit Circumpolar Conference and the proposed Arctic Council that can respond to the new political, environmental, and security challenges facing Canada.
*5. Non-Governmental Organizations.
Forum participants suggested that business and professional associations, non-governmental organizations, churches, and universities should be key agents for Canada to exercise its influence internationally.
They should be the Government's strategic partners.
The Government should co-ordinate its policies more closely with organizations in the private sector, facilitate their entry into international activity, and deploy resources together to achieve maximum effectiveness.
Policy Making
Forum participants agreed that the first National Forum was a valuable experiment and an impressive beginning in opening up the policy process.
The bringing together of people from different sectors who focussed on the co-ordination of policy objectives and the development of policy linkages was especially useful.
Forum participants considered that sectoral discussions could not provide the same kind of opportunity to consider co-ordination, linkages, and the hard choices.
Forum members emphasized, however, that much more needs to be done if Canada's foreign and defence policies are to be democratized, linked to the domestic agenda, and rooted in Canadian values and society.
Four priorities were identified: co-ordination, accountability, public education, and the capacity for informed analysis of policy.
*1. Co-ordination.
Members of the Forum urged that foreign and defence policy be better integrated so that maximum efficiency and effectiveness can be achieved in Canada's international relations.
Trade, defence, assistance, migration, environmental policies, the promotion of human rights, and participation in multilateral institutions must be co-ordinated.
Forum participants suggested that the Government put in place procedures to increase the flow of people and ideas between government departments and other groups in society so that policy is enriched, better co-ordinated, and better understood.
Forum members suggested that the Government actively promote co-operation among government, business, university, and non-governmental organizations.
Such co-operation is important to the development of the knowledge-based products and services that are essential for Canada's active engagement in the global environment.
*2. Accountability and Education.
Participants in the Forum welcomed the Government's intention to give Parliament a more active role in the process of making foreign and defence policy accountable and transparent.
Parliament or its committees should be equipped with permanent research staff and policy analysts so that they can review policy more effectively and contribute to informed public debate on Canada's international relations.
*3. Policy Analysis.
Forum participants identified a need to enhance and co-ordinate timely and high-quality analysis of Canada's international relations.
Unique among OECD countries, Canada has no national institute that co-ordinates existing foreign and defence policy analysis, identifies priorities for analysis, and contributes to the public debate.
Forum participants urged that the Government consider a permanent national Forum or Centre for Foreign Policy Development, jointly funded by the public and private sector, that can help to co-ordinate research and analytic resources to avoid duplication and maximize effectiveness, provide the essential infrastructure for a co-ordinated capacity to address issues, and review and evaluate policy and the linkages among components of Canada's international relations.
Participants in the National Forum on Canada's International Relations welcome enthusiastically the significant beginning that has been made in the opening up of the policy debate and in the consideration of new ideas and approaches at a historic moment in Canada's international relations.
Forum members consider it essential that the policy process be democratized and open to new ideas and new participants as the Government of Canada moves increasingly toward strategic partnerships with society in a world that will reward those with the best knowledge, skills, and expertise.
We wish to thank the Ministers of Foreign Affairs and National Defence, and the Minister for International Trade for their sponsorship, support, and participation.
On behalf of members of the Forum, we respectfully submit this report.
Pierre S. Pettigrew Janice Gross Stein April 15, 1994. 
END.