CHAPTER 1: RETHINKING THE FOREIGN POLICY AGENDA Foreign policy is made, not given.
It is a continual process of exercising political will, of mobilizing national resources to meet international challenges.
Even the most powerful nations in the world must take full account of international forces; how much more true of Canada.
Conversely, foreign policies are also determined by internal forces.
The ability to mobilize national resources depends on a country's human and physical attributes but beyond that on a sense of purpose that comes from a successful combination of national goals and international responsibilities.
In Canada's case the potential is there, as is the desire of Canadians to see their country continue to play a responsible and influential role in the world.
We hope this report will help give sharpened purpose to that desire.
Every foreign policy review must respond to a set of changing international and domestic circumstances.
The 1969-70 review occurred during the Cold War, but when there were glimmerings of détente and when Canadians were preoccupied with issues of unity and independence.
By 1985-86, when the last review was conducted, the themes were international security and competitiveness, independence and internationalism.
The circumstances of 1994 are once more different from those of only a decade ago.
We are in a new era of accelerated change, as we have been told repeatedly in the course of our hearings.
The most dramatic change has been the passing of the Cold War, but other interrelated forces are changing the nature of security, globalizing economies and societies, and reshaping national sovereignty.
The Changing Global Scene The end of the Cold War has transformed the security environment, not only in Europe but around the world.
In Europe the old Yalta order has been swept away but has not yet been succeeded by a new order.
It has brought freedom and the opportunity to build better societies, but it has left elements of uncertainty, instability and disunity.
There is uncertainty about the transition to democracy in Eastern Europe and Russia, as Université du Québec à Montréal professor Jacques Lévesque told us. 
There is instability arising from the re-emergence out of the communist deep freeze of long-standing nationalist rivalries and ethnic tensions, not least in the former Soviet Union.
And there is disunity, not only in the East, where the communist system has disintegrated, but also in the West, where the end of the East-West ideological struggle has, as Dalhousie professor Denis Stairs explained (18:21), weakened the perceived need for transatlantic solidarity.
In Asia too the passing of the Cold War is a mixed blessing.
It has put an end to the US-Soviet competition and the Sino-Soviet stand-off, and with the possible exception of North Korea, has encouraged a greater opening to exchanges with the West.
The finding of a new regional equilibrium is likely to be complicated, however, as University of British Columbia professor Brian Job pointed out, by "territorial disputes, proliferation of weapons, possibilities of civil unrest, and the prospect of unsustainable 
In the rest of the world the old compass bearings have gone.
East-West relations no longer define North-South relations, and for some countries international assistance has lost its dominant geopolitical dimension.
North and South have themselves become imprecise terms; the very notion of the Third World has become obsolete at a time when the South is increasingly diverse, and the gap between rich and poor is as great within the South as it is between North and South.
The new world presents threats but also opportunities.
Instead of the relatively stable East-West confrontation there is, in the words of Dalhousie professor Dan Middlemiss (18:14) a "threat-ambiguous environment" which is difficult to plan for.
Where once we knew who the adversary was, future adversaries are unpredictable or elusive.
The problem is no longer defence of the West against the East, but collective assurance for all against a breakdown of international law and order caused by those who still rely on the unauthorized use of force to impose their will.
That is the challenge.
